A Coarse Sorting of the Readily Available by Michael MacGarry: The artist uses objects he found in the area near his studio in Johannesburg. The exhibition includes a mix of sculpture, installation, video and two-­dimensional work.
Details: The exhibition runs until December 2 at Everard Read Circa, 3 Portswood Road, V&A Waterfront, Cape Town. For more information visit everard-read-capetown.co.za The Art Franschhoek Festival: This festival gives visitors an opportunity to explore numerous galleries while interacting with the valley’s resident artists. Wine farms will have artworks on display and others will have garden tours. For example, La Motte Museum will show work by artists such as JH Pierneef, Walter Battiss and John Muafangejo, and the Gallery at Grand Provence includes South African sculpture, ceramics and African artefacts. Details: The festival takes place until November  25. For the full programme visit franschhoekart.co.za/art-programme A Strawberry Affair Market: The Stellenbosch Slow Market will have everything from freshly picked strawberries to strawberry bath salts on sale this weekend. Details: The market is on November 24 at the Oude Libertas Amphitheatre, 41 Oude Libertas Road, Devon Park, Stellenbosch. For more information visit oudelibertas.co.za. A Letter to My 22-year-old Self: Curated by Banele Khoza, this mixed-medium group exhibition is a forum for emerging and established artists. Details: The exhibition is on until January 25 at the Absa Art Gallery, Upper Ground Floor, Absa Towers, North 161 Main Street, Johannesburg. For more information visit absa.co.za Mbuso Khoza at the Market Theatre: This weekend the award-winning jazz vocalist will perform a repertoire drawn mostly from his new album Eshowe. In addition to a live band, Khoza will be accompanied by special guest artist Zawadi Yamungu. Details: The show runs from November 23 to 25 at the Market Theatre, 56 Margaret Mcingana Street, Newtown, Johannesburg. Tickets cost R150 and can be purchased from webticket.co.za. For more information visit markettheatre.co.za