The rand took a beating this week as it reached lows last seen six months ago and edged dangerously close to the R14-to-the-dollar mark. Experts believe this could only get worse because global and local markets are forecast to remain volatile. The market positivity that ushered South Africa into 2018 after the ascendance of President Cyril Ramaphosa now seems like a distant memory, with foreign investors pulling their money out and increasing market anxiety about the further escalation of a trade war between the world’s two largest economies, the United States and China. READ MORE: World watches US-China trade spat Economist Mike Schussler said the effects on the rand were not isolated but were part of a broader emerging markets issue on the back of a strengthening dollar and risk aversion from foreign investors who are moving their investments back to the US, where interest rates are rising. After the 2008 global financial crisis, foreign investors pumped investment into emerging markets, where interests rates were much higher than in the US. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.