After ten months of negotiations, about 40% of the public sector unions have signed a three year wage offer from the department of public service and administration (DPSA), and the remaining unions have just over two weeks to formally accept or reject the deal. The talks continued past the implementation date at the beginning of the financial year in April, and mark the first time that the government has failed to secure a deal — since South Africa shifted the end of its financial year from July to April in 2007. “The changes in government didn’t help because it caused delays, that’s what hardened attitudes for so long,” Cosatu lead negotiator Mike Shingange said. If the majority of unions do not sign the deal before the end of June, the state can unilaterally implement the agreement as it did in 2010 under the leadership of then minister Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi. The offer is an increase of between 6% and 7% in the first year, and 6% for the remaining two years. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.