Party calls off regional conferences amid complaints about irregularities and one faction is in court to force Ramaphosa to disband Eastern Cape leadership. The massive cyber attack that hacked clients’ personal information at Liberty has one lesson for all: never use the same password for different accounts; make each one unique; and change them regularly, an expert says. A human-trafficking ring is suspected to be behind the abduction of 26 women in the country, who have been rescued after they were found locked yo in a dingy room in Jo’burg. Caster Semenya, the 800m world and Olympic champion, yesterday filed a legal challenge to the controversial IAAF female classification rules, saying “I just want to run naturally, the way I was born.” Less than two weeks after advertising authorities ruled in MTN’s favour, Vodacom has won the latest round in the battle between SA’s two biggest mobile operators. The Murray & Roberts board has not given up on its bid to implement a merger with Aveng despite a Competition Tribunal ruling that appeared to kill off its chances of pushing through the necessary resolution at Tuesday’s shareholder meeting. She is angry because she is in the spotlight for all the wrong reasons. Criticism of the policy grew louder after a recording of children crying out for their parents at a border detention facility was released by ProPublica. Trump said he won’t let the US become a “migrant camp,” and blamed Democrats for obstructing immigration reform.
(Reuters) The Japanese camera company is accusing Xerox of breach of contract and engaging in “intentional and egregious conduct” after it abandoned a $6.1-billion merger following pressure from activist investors Carl Icahn and Darwin Deason. (Reuters) Backstage is not the first collection to feature such a wide variety of shades at a reasonable price point. Indeed, since Rihanna’s Fenty Beauty launched last September with 40 shades of its own foundation, industry mainstays like CoverGirl and Revlon, cult favourite like Smashbox and Tarte, along with social media stars like ColourPop, have extended their own lines to include 40 foundations or more.