Western Cape Judge President John Hlophe has asked for the recusal of one member of the panel investigating a gross misconduct complaint against him. In a letter to Bloemfontein high court Judge Cagney Musi last week, Hlophe accuses the judge, one of three people who must decide whether he is guilty of gross misconduct, of having made disparaging comments about him and therefore not having “an open mind” about the complaint against Hlophe. After a decade-long delay, a judicial conduct tribunal is to begin on Monday July 2. The recusal application could mean yet another delay to the finalisation of a complaint that, when it was first made, stunned the judiciary and the country. In May 2008, the Judicial Service Commission (JSC) received a misconduct complaint unlike any it had received before (or since): every justice of the Constitutional Court complained that Hlophe had improperly sought to influence the outcome of a judgment, then pending before the country’s highest court, related to the prosecution of Jacob Zuma on corruption charges. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.