Economists are revising down their forecasts for growth in 2018 after the economy contracted at a worse than expected 2.2% in the first quarter, raising questions about how soon the confidence boost generated by SA’s new political leadership might translate into stronger investment and growth. The Hawks last week raided the offices of MTN and the mobile operator’s lawyers, Webber Wentzel, to look for evidence of corruption related to MTN’s 2005 Iranian deal. READ MORE: MTN rocked by Iran licence bribery scandal A draft of the revised third Mining Charter may be unveiled on June 8, but there is a heated discussion about a 10% “free-carry” component in the unchanged empowerment ownership level of 30% for newly issued mining rights, says Deputy Mineral Resources Minister Godfrey Oliphant. READ MORE: Mantashe takes on mining laws A woman who claims she had to give up her car and her job in order to become the “good housewife” that her now estranged common-law husband wanted is claiming R63 000 a month in maintenance from him. From expensive wines to cognac and traditional Zulu spears and cows — this is what some of our politicians have received from various people across the world and locally. READ MORE: SA politicians’ assets made public in online database A disgruntled former prison employee lifts the lid on alleged money wasting, sex session between staff and inmates, and female staff watching porn with men serving time at Modderbee prison in Springs. The posthumous Sama Lifetime Achievement Award bestowed on Stokes H, the 90s pop star, has awoken a bitter family feud. At first her diary tells the story of a young woman in love. But then it becomes a tale of tears and a woman betrayed. The flag carrier’s route between Beijing and Pyongyang was suspended in November amid tension over Kim Jong Un’s nuclear weapons program.
Its resumption signals closer ties ahead of next week’s US-North Korea summit. (Yonhap News Agency) An arrangement dating back to at least 2010 gave Huawei and other Chinese firms detailed information on device users and their friends. Huawei, closely tied to China’s government, has been flagged by US intelligence officials as a national security threat. (The New York Times) The iconic handbag designer sold her namesake company, founded with her husband Andy Spade, in 2006. She was 55. (Quartz) Farmers and small businesses around Kolionovo, 80 miles from the capital, are ditching the ruble and switching to a cryptocurrency — the kolion — to pay for local trade. (CNN)