The Electoral Commission of South Africa could be forced to remove 1.3 million people from its voters roll if the Constitutional Court fails to grant it an extension to secure addresses for these voters. The government has proposed a new “pay as you go” system for dealing with medical-negligence clams against the state, in a bill critics say could prejudice patients by limiting their choices and forcing them to seek care from the very facilities that harmed them in the first place. Dozens of mining assets and some equipment belonging to a Gupta-owned company will go under the hammer next week as part of efforts to raise more than R45-million to pay some of the family’s creditors. READ MORE: Gupta firms are viable but ... A David versus Goliath legal war is brewing between pay-per-view MultiChoice and Connect.tv in one corner against a budding TV writer who is suing them for R30-million over the popular uTatakho concept. As petrol and diesel prices in South Africa hit record highs from midnight tonight, our neighbours in southern Africa pay up to 30% less per litre than we do — although the fuel all comes through this country. Family tells of the pain of losing a young man forced to hang himself after he was wrongly accused of killing an elderly woman. He believes his appetite for sex is a curse. And now the 68-year-old madala is pleading for help. Prime Minister Viktor Orban of Hungary is quietly buying media outlets across Central and Eastern Europe to extend his nationalist influence and undermine the European Union.
(The New York Times) The Supreme Court on Monday ruled in favour of a Colorado baker who had refused to create a wedding cake for a gay couple. The court’s decision was narrow, and it left open the larger question of whether a business can discriminate against gay men and lesbians based on rights protected by the First Amendment. (The New York Times) A woman with advanced breast cancer which had spread around her body has been completely cleared of the disease by a groundbreaking therapy that harnessed the power of her immune system to fight the tumours. (The Guardian) READ MORE: Breast cancer study reveals fewer women will need chemotherapy President Donald Trump asserted on Monday that he has the right to pardon himself but suggested that he won’t use that power, adding that the special counsel investigation is “unconstitutional.” (CNN)