The allegations in Prasa’s legal risk and compliance executive Martha Ngoye’s affidavit add to the growing criticism of Judge Tintswalo Makhubele’s intentions by organisations such as #UniteBehind. The social movement has already raised concerns about whether, by accepting her appointment to the Prasa board despite being recommended for a position on the Bench, Makhubele had thrust herself into a position where her interests were conflicted. Judges are not allowed take up an appointment seen to be inconsistent with an independent judiciary or that would undermine the separation of powers doctrine. Makhubele, previously a silk at the Pretoria Bar, was recommended for appointment as a judge by the Judicial Service Commission (JSC) in October last year and was expected to begin active service on January 1 2018. She was appointed to the Prasa board on October 17 2017 and asked that her date of appointment be delayed to April 1 2018. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.