Stories making headlines locally Trades unions at Eskom tabled a long list of demands on Wednesday that includes a 9% wage hike for 2018, almost twice what the utility offered. READ MORE: Eskom tables new 4.7% wage hike offer to avert strike A weaker rand and rising fuel prices will ensure that any relief from the surprise slowdown in inflation in May will be short-lived. The new mobile operator backed by prominent businessmen Patrice Motsepe, Paul Harris and Michael Jordaan is taking the fight over data prices to sector giants Vodacom and MTN ANC bigwigs — including a former governing party president’s grandson, top businesspeople and a fore spy boss — are among several wealthy and prominent black industrialists who got a share in more than R9.1-billion in state funding. Supermodel and TV personality Shashi Naidoo admitted her little understanding of the Gaza conflict after her ill-informed post on social media triggered death threats READ MORE: Shashi Naidoo to visit Palestine on ‘fact-finding mission’ “It’s pains me to see our patients sleeping with only one or two blankets in these freezing wards,” a Limpopo doctor wrote in a heartwarming plea to the public for 50 heaters — but his disregard for red tape doesn’t sit well with the provincial health department. ANC MP Sibusiso Radebe was shot and killed in cold blood as his girlfriend watched helplessly. For two years he rampaged around the west of Gauteng, raping, murdering and robing without mercy. Match Group will add Hinge to a portfolio that includes OkCupid and Plenty of Fish. Hinge helps people meet long-term partners and purportedly appeals to urban, millennial women—useful as Match takes on Bumble, a dating app that specifically targets women.
(The Verge) Rupert Murdoch and his fellow directors decided that Disney’s sweetened $71-billion bid —which would bring The Simpsons, X-Men, Pixar, and Marvel under one roof — was “superior” to Comcast’s. There is still time for Comcast to up its ante, although its debt-heavy balance sheet doesn’t provide much room to maneuver. (Bloomberg) President Trump signed an executive order on Wednesday to end his controversial policy that has resulted in thousands of family separations and brought criticism from Democrats and Republicans. (NPR) READ MORE: Trump orders halt to family separations South Korea’s Moon Jae-in suggests Russian gas be piped to Koreas, Japan New pipelines could be laid to bring Russian gas through North Korea to the South and even on to Japan following the diplomatic thaw with Pyongyang, Seoul’s leader suggested on Wednesday (June 20). (The Strait Times)