Petroleum giant Engen has gone to court to stop protests by residents of Durban’s Wentworth township who want it to give them shares in the company, jobs and contracts as “reparations” for alleged damage it has caused to their community over the past 60 years. On Monday, the Durban high court will hear an application by Engen for an interim order to stop members of the South Durban Basin Community Development Trust from protesting outside its refinery in Tara Road.  In papers, the refinery’s acting general manager, Ernest Reid, said the forum, led by Frank Alexander, had refused to participate in its stakeholder engagement forum and instead had conducted protests, including burning tyres, outside the refinery. Engen wants the protests, which Reid said were illegal as the refinery is a national key point, halted, saying Engen risked incurring “irreparable losses” from the damage caused. Alexander said the trust was consulting its lawyers.  [Investment: Local activist Frank Alexander wants to see Engen make lasting financial, employment and infrastructure contributions to his community. (Rogan Ward/M&G)] The protesters have been pressing Engen, which, as Mobil, opened its refinery in Tara Road in 1954, to be “transparent” about the proposed sale by majority shareholder Petronas, which controls 74% of the company. The refinery has a capacity of 135 000 barrels of crude oil a day and supplies 1 500 service stations in Southern Africa and the Indian Ocean islands. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.