High court Judge Tintswalo Makhubele, the former acting chairperson of the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (Prasa) board, who asked for a delay before she started active service at the Gauteng division of the high court, is alleged to have used that extra time at the state-owned enterprise to push through a R60-million settlement with a questionable service provider. The allegations have raised questions about her probity and caused consternation among judges in the division where she started work on June 1 — and where the Prasa-linked litigation is being heard. It has also raised questions about what happens when new information about a judge comes to light after the Judicial Service Commission (JSC) has made a recommendation for an appointment, but before active service has commenced. The allegations in court documents in the Mail & Guardian’s possession paint a picture of how Makhubele appeared to act with indecent haste — and against the advice of Prasa’s in-house legal team — to push through the R60-million settlement in respect of payment claims by a group of “Siyaya entities”. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.