ANC national chairperson Gwede Mantashe has demanded disciplinary action against KZN party delegates who heckled and prevented him from addressing the conference of the party’s biggest province READ MORE: Chaos as Mantashe addresses ANC KZN conference-turned-meeting Family, support and sticking to the coaches plan are reasons for victory in this year’s Comrades Marathon, say winners Bong’musa Mthembu and Ann Ashworth. The Gauteng Department of Health is investigating the mystery surrounding a baby boy who allegedly went missing soon after his birth at Refentse public clinic in Stinkwater, north of Pretoria. It’s been two years since Victor Mlotshwa faced death when he was forced into a coffin alive. A traditional cleansing has put him on the road to recovery. The gloves are off between the ANC and SACP in North West with the SACP accusing former premier Supra Mahumapelo, of fostering anarchy by supporting former president Jacob Zuma at his trial. READ MORE: Zuma’s supporters up the ante Minister of Basic Education Angie Motshekga plans to lobby for a change of legislation to ensure that people who burn schools and infrastructure are punished harshly. President Ramaphosa’s efforts to unite warring factions in the ANC in Limpopo have received a major boost Busisiwe Mashiane has come up with a new and cheaper way rural communities can purify their natural water using sand and the sun Eskom says there are no plans to privatise the public power utility and it is only calling for the liberalisation of the market for more competition within the power sector. The ANC is going “back to the future” through invoking the heroes from its past to bring about much-needed unity ahead of the 2019 polls. Eskom, which is fighting for survival, has dragged its regulator to court over its tariff decision and is toughing it out with employees with a wage freeze, despite the growing prospect of a strike. The Directorate for Prority Crime Investigation also known as the Hawks, raided the Bank of Baroda’s offices in SA as part of its investigations into state capture involving the controversial Gupta family. Video Assistant Referees at the World Cup finals in Russia might help African teams to do better than they have done so far.
(The Conversation) The UK’s Brexit secretary, David Davis, and the chief EU negotiator, Michel Barnier, meet in Brussels. Barnier is unimpressed by the latest UK proposals over the Irish border. (Quartz/ Irish Times) President Trump lashed out through his advisers at Canada’s prime minister in unusually personal terms. The combative remarks escalated a bitter conflict with some of America’s closest allies, leaving him with a diplomatic crisis as he prepares to meet the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un. (The New York Times)