The tragic deaths of four miners have been blamed on a shift manager, accused of putting profits before lives, by allegedly forcing the group of workers to work in an abandoned and dangerous underground stope. READ MORE: Death toll at Sibanye-Stillwater mine rises to four, one miner still missing The granddaughter of a Gauteng MEC attempted suicide months after she was allegedly raped by a soccer player. Efforts to clean a Gauteng school of drugs and violence has landed a principal in trouble with suspected drug dealers. They are tired of being targets for cash in transit thugs and they want more protection and better security. READ MORE: ‘We fear for our lives’: Cash-in-transit guards call for more protection Leaders of the National Union of Mineworkers and the National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa want to speak to the president about the problems at Eskom. READ MORE: No shutdown yet for Eskom workers A grade 5 pupil was among the 1 000 schoolgirls who fell pregnant in Ekurhuleni last year. DA leaders remain unhappy with the election of Natasha Mazzone as the party’s second deputy federal chairperson, insisting that she is occupying the position illegally. READ MORE: DA clarifies appointment of Mazzone as second deputy chairperson After surviving a grueling year of preparatory measures from the Reserve Bank, Nthabeleng Likotsi is determined to have her co-operative, Young Women in Business Network, turned into the first black female-owned Mutual Bank in South Africa. In what Joburg mayor Herman Mashaba has described as a “wastershed moment” since taking over the reins, the R59-billion City of Joburg budget for 2019-2019 financial year was unanimously approved during third council session yesterday. A rowdy group of Ga-Rankuwa residents, some clad in ANC t-shirts, told Tshwane mayor Solly Msimanga to “voetsek” out of Zone 6 yesterday claiming he was only in the area to campaign for the party. Dutch investors Association VEB has issued summons against Deloitte for breach of obligations when it audited Steinhoff holdings. Time is slipping away for SA if public sector debtor continues to spiral, the IMF warned. The 17-year-old prodigy thrilled the world and set the scene for Brazil’s decades-long dominance of the World Game. (The Conversation) President Trump used flattery, cajolery and a slick film in his quest to persuade Kim Jong-un, North Korea’s leader, to give up nuclear arms. But a joint statement signed by the two after their meeting was as skimpy as the summit was extravagant. (The New York Times) The company said it would ax thousands of employees in a restructuring. Musk said that the cuts would not affect factory workers and “production associates” crucial to manufacturing the Model 3 and Tesla’s hope of turning an annual profit for the first time in 2018. (Quartz)