A toxic mix of bureaucratic failure, tensions between local government and traditional leaders and infighting among residents has slowed down the process of land restitution in KwaZulu-Natal. Representatives of rural areas, including existing land claimants, traditional leaders and groups wanting to lodge claims, painted a bleak picture of their struggle for land restitution during public hearings by Parliament’s land reform portfolio committee in Ulundi and Port Shepstone this week. Claimants from several areas spoke of their difficulty in having claims, some lodged as far back as 1998, processed and settled. Milton Cele, a claimant from Izingolweni near the South Coast, said his claim, lodged in November 1997, had still not been resolved. Others said they had been told by officials from the land reform department that their paperwork had been lost; still others said their claims had been successful but they had not yet been paid. Lila Nkosi, a claimant from Jozini who had been evicted from a farm in Ulundi in the 1970s, told the hearing her claim had been settled but she had been unable to return to the land as the current tenants refused to go. Other claimants told of disputes among members of community trusts set up to lodge claims. Statistics presented by the department show that 15 000 claims were lodged between 1996 and 1998 in KwaZulu-Natal, with a further 40 277 lodged between 2014 and 2016. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.