Trade union federation Cosatu in KwaZulu-Natal wants people who live on land controlled by the Ingonyama Trust to be given individual land tenure rights. Cosatu, which elected new provincial leaders last weekend, “strongly believes” the “sensitive” issue has to be resolved and that “every person needs to have the right to own their piece of land”. This comes as Parliament prepares to hold hearings on land reform legislation in KwaZulu-Natal next week, with new threats of legal action to prevent changes that will strip King Goodwill Zwelithini of control of almost three million hectares of land. On Monday, Parliament’s portfolio committee on land reform and rural development will hear public inputs on the Restitution of Land Rights Amendment Bill in Ulundi in Zululand, and a second hearing is scheduled for Port Shepstone on the South Coast the following day. Earlier in the week, Judge Jerome Ngwenya, the chairperson of the Ingonyama Trust Board, which administers the land on the king’s behalf, told Independent Newspapers that he had written to President Cyril Ramaphosa requesting a meeting to discuss plans to scrap the trust. Ngwenya also said the king’s plan to challenge any move to close down the trust in court was still on track, as was the collecting of R5 upwards from each of his “subjects” to fund the case. The monarch has been vocal about proposals by Parliament’s high-level panel on legislative obstacles to improving quality of life, chaired by former president Kgalema Motlanthe, aimed at giving security of land tenure to people who live on land under tribal control. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.