Johannesburg and Mamelodi in Tshwane saw two completely different sides of taxi drivers yesterday. Drivers in one city showed their disdain for the law and in the other, they enforced the law. Wits vice-chancellor Adam Habib allegedly used his position to influence the awarding of a bursary to one of his son’s friends. Capped doctor’s fees to be imposed by the national health insurance legislation could see a mass exodus of doctors from the system, an industry expert has warned. Four Soweto police officers have spoken out about their humiliating ordeal after they were ordered to strip naked before being searched by their colleagues. Local rapper Sjava not only stole the night in Hollywood with his big win at the BET Awards, but he made a proudly South African statement as he collected his gong in his Zulu attire. Please Call Me inventor Nkosana Makate and Vodacom are back in court today as the cellphone giant tries to force him not to disclose details of their ongoing settlement negotiations. The freezing river ripped at her little body and it was only a matter of time before she surrendered to the strong water but then help arrived. Dissolve the Ingonyama Trust and lose power back to the IFP in KZN. This is the warning from University of Western Cape professor Bheki Mngomezulu and KZN political analyst Thabani Khumalo to the ANC. READ MORE: It’s ANC vs ANC as land ‘war’ looms Former president Jacob Zuma’s court bid to stop his criminal trial from going ahead suffered a major setback after the government refused to guarantee funding for his attempts to thwart the process. READ MORE: State will pay Zuma’s legal fees until court rules otherwise A joint team of banking and government officials has been established to look into the immediate funding needs of the state-owned enterprises that are facing difficulty in meeting their obligations to pay staff and suppliers. READ MORE: BASA says members willing to help out stressed parastals The ANC said it was “shocked” by the scale of corruption in the state, and has conceded that despite setting up mechanisms to combat graft, “powerful individuals” had managed to loot government coffers. SuperSport and most of its black presenters have seemingly smoked the proverbial peace pipe after a racial storm that became public at the weekend READ MORE: Investigation into letter from aggrieved SuperSport presenters nears end The grenade attack shows that opponents are threatened by Ethiopian Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed’s progress. (The Conversation) READ MORE: One dead, scores injured in grenade blast at Ethiopia PM’s rally READ MORE: Ethiopia, Zimbabwe, and the explosive power of change The ride-sharing company is challenging a decision by Transport for London that it is unfit to run a taxi service. The regulator cited the company’s delays in reporting criminal offences and conducting driver background checks. (Reuters)