A last-minute resignation of a board member at the Mining Qualifications Authority (MQA) has lifted the lid on how this sector education and training authority (Seta) paid out hundreds of millions of rands to private companies — some owned by MQA employees or their relatives — without following internal procurement policy. Azaria Tshangase, who resigned from the MQA board last week, refused to confirm whether he had declared his interest in his and his wife’s company, Tshepo Recruitment Mining, which had done business with the Seta in 2015. The MQA, one of 21 Setas overseen by the department of higher education and training, is recovering from years of maladministration and corrupt practices, said its acting chief executive, Tebogo Mmotla, this week.  This was in response to Mail & Guardian inquiries about the status of seven adverse forensic audits in 2015 that have yielded little action. Mmotla himself is mentioned in some of the reports for allowing junior employees to make final decisions on allocating millions of rands to training centres. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.