Thousands of public sector workers over the age of 60 will be offered voluntary retrenchment as part of an effort by the government to cut its salary bill. The failure of the South African Bureau of Standards board to act timeously on an irregular certificate it issued on behalf of a Gupta-owned Tegeta mine is one of the reasons the government wants to suspends its board. Parliament’s justice and correctional services portfolio committee chairman Mathole Motshekga came out to bat for public protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane on Wednesday in the face of a DA onslaught. Violence in ANC branch meetings ahead of Gauteng’s elective conference has prompted community safety MEC Sizakele Nkosi-Malobane to request deployment of crime intelligence and plain-clothes police to the gatherings. READ MORE: Parks Tau positions himself to capture Gauteng READ MORE: Battle on for top posts in Gauteng ANC The Fifa 2018 World Cup kicks off in Russia today – and, as happens every four years with this global spectacle, an audience of billions will be bewitched by every touch and pass. Former SABC COO Hlaudi Motsoeneng yesterday told the CCMA during his challenge to what he sees as his “unfair dismissal”, that he did not cost the SABC millions of rands in advertising revenue. The US, Mexico and Canada won their joint bid to host the 2026 World Cup, beating Morocco by 134 votes to 65. READ MORE: US, Canada and Mexico to host 2026 World Cup Kloof mine has promised the families of dead miners they will receive financial relief above and beyond the regular employee benefits. READ MORE: Death toll at Sibanye-Stillwater mine rises to four, one miner still missing Trouble is brewing at Optimum Coal Mine in Hendrina, Mpumalanga where workers once again downed tools yesterday A surprise visit by the human right commission has revealed that expired food and medications are being served to patients at a major hospital in Limpopo. A row over the election of Natasha Mazzone as the DA’s second deputy federal chairperson took another turn yesterday, with the party’s Western Cape leader Bonginkosi Madikizela saying the appointment must be tabled before the party’s federal council. Starting from July 1, Johannesburg, residents will be required to recycle in their households, MMC for environmental affairs and infrastructure Nico de Jager said this week. When Senegal face Poland in their first World Cup match in Russia, the whole nation will be roaring them on to victory. (The Conversation) Rejoicing in the glow of a historic encounter with Kim Jong-un, President Trump declared that North Korea was “no longer a nuclear threat.” “Sleep well tonight!” Trump reassured Americans. But the path to disarmament remained no clearer a day after the meeting. (The New York Times)