A pressure group has joined growing calls for Health Minister Dr Aaron Motsoaledi’s head in a fierce fight linked to the looming introduction of National Health Insurance. A KwaZulu-Natal minority rights group is looking to open a third case against EFF leader Julius Malema for claiming that the majority of Indians are racist. READ MORE: Malema continues to support Shivambu on Momoniat matter In another blow for investment tycoon Christo Wiese, industrial supplies conglomerate Invicta Holdings — in which he is the biggest shareholder — issued a shock update on Friday highlighting potentially costly tax liabilities. Public Enterprise Minister Pravin Gordhan intervened in Eskom’s wage dispute because he believed prolonged load shedding will have a huge negative effect on the already sluggish economy. READ MORE: Flailing Eskom out of options The life insurance industry is on high alert after the cyberattack and blackmail attempt on insurer Liberty. The firm had regained control of its IT systems by Sunday. Capitec, Nedbank and the Public Investment Corporation are among local contenders that may pay up to R5-billion for Mercantile Bank With 10 more days of load shedding looming, Eskom is not only costing the SA economy dearly, but also expect some job losses at the utility, economists say. Eskom says load shedding will happen daily between 5pm and 7pm.
Workers at the power utility are blaming bloated management structure for the crisis. On Tuesday the mutilated body of an unknown man was found lying in the bush. Nobody knew who he was until Friday, when another shocking discovery was made. Senior officials on both sides expect to cancel the Ulchi Freedom Guardian military exercise, scheduled for August, after Donald Trump’s surprise announcement that he would end such joint drills. The move should please North Korean leader Kim Jong Un. (Yonhap News Agency) The investment in JD.com, part of a broader partnership, will help the US tech giant expand in fast-growing Asian markets and take on rivals including Amazon.com. For its part, JD.com will be able to better reach consumers in the US and European markets. (Reuters) Mexicans jumping in jubilation on Sunday shook the ground hard enough to set off earthquake detectors after their team scored a surprise victory over World Cup defending champions Germany. (The Guardian) READ MORE: ‘Earthquake of joy’ over Mexico’s World Cup upset win