The appeal panel of the Judicial Conduct Committee (JCC) has ordered a probe into the behaviour of a labour court judge accused of misconduct in his handling of a dispute between energy company Sasol and a former employee. Former Sasol employee Andile Maseko lodged a complaint against Judge Anton Steenkamp, accusing him of ignoring written submissions in his labour dispute with Sasol, allegedly lying about not receiving the documents and reaching an unfair judgment in favour of the company. The complaint arose out of a protracted dispute between Maseko and Sasol about what Maseko said was his unfair dismissal. Maseko’s application in court was dismissed by Steenkamp, who ordered that Maseko may not litigate further against the company until he had satisfied the costs orders against him in his previous cases against the company. Steenkamp also said in his judgment that he had not received further written submissions from Maseko and his lawyers, a claim the disgruntled employee denies. “The judge is lying when he says that he didn’t receive anything from my lawyers. This is serious misconduct … the emails were sent on the 10th, 11th and 12th of August 2016,” Maseko claimed in his submissions to the JCC. Steenkamp, however, says he checked with his assistant, his associate and the registrar’s office, all of whom said they had no record of Maseko’s submissions to date. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.