Although some major retailers and fast-food outlets have announced that they will be reducing their plastic footprint over the next few years, at least one restaurant group in Johannesburg is already doing so. “When it comes to plastic and stuff, the only thing I can honestly say we use for plastic — because of health regulations — is bin bags,” said James Diack, the founder of the Brightside Group, which owns four environmentally conscious and sustainable restaurants across the city. At his Parkhurst restaurant, Coobs, Diack said that waste reduction, recycling and reusing had long been part of the group’s identity, since it opened its first restaurant six years ago. READ MORE: There’s much more to the plastic pollution crisis than carrier bags “I came from a fine dining background in Cape Town and the waste there was a problem,” said Diack. “I couldn’t believe we had to waste so much — you use this little bit and have to throw it away. “When we opened Coobs, we opened it with that in mind.” The restaurant tries to eliminate all unnecessary waste. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.