For the rand, Ramaphoria is over. The currency slumped as much as 2% against the dollar on Tuesday to its weakest level in more than six months — when Jacob Zuma was still president. READ MORE: Success of Ramaphosa’s investment drive out of his hands Cash-strapped Eskom has offered its employees an inflation-targeted 4.7% wage increase for 2018 and inflation-based increases for the three years thereafter. READ MORE: Eskom tables new 4.7% wage hike offer to avert strike Christopher Seabrooke, chairman of Brait’s audit committee, is adamant that the investment company’s management is sticking around to get growth in net asset value and in the share price back on track. A second Putco fare price hike this year underlines the prevailing economic crunch that is making life unbearable for consumers. Ashwin Willemse declined to take part in the investigation into his SuperSport studio walkout because he felt it was an attempt to plaster over what he believes to be a racist incident. READ MORE: Willemse lawyer — No value in participating in SuperSport review Mallett asked the SuperSport executive in 2016 for Willemse to be moved to another slot so they didn’t work together as “I think he talks like garbage” and “we irritate the hell out of each other”, a report revealed yesterday. READ MORE: No racism in Willemse walk-out, says SuperSport A shocking report show rape of women in the country is one of the highest in the world: 250 out of every 100 000 The man who was assaulted to death, allegedly by two police officers, was also choked and his face covered with teargas-filled plastic during the attack. Somizi Mhlongo has been served a letter of demand from ‘80s bubblegum singer and hairdresser Eric D who disputes what Somizi says in his book. A European Parliament committee will vote on two measures that internet luminaries consider disastrous. One could force Google and others to pay publishers for showing news snippets, while another would make online platforms like YouTube install filters to stop users from uploading copyrighted materials. (Reuters) After a week of escalating rhetoric, the US and China are edging closer to a trade war. Investors were spooked, sending major stock indexes down sharply yesterday, as the Dow Jones Industrial Average dipped into negative territory for the year. Asian markets opened mixed today. (Quartz) Donald Trump’s longtime fixer has reportedly hired Guy Petrillo, a high-profile criminal attorney and former federal prosecutor in New York’s Southern District, which is now investigating Cohen for bank fraud and campaign finance violations. Cohen is expected to face significant pressure to testify against the president. (Vanity Fair) Modern humans are hyperconnected, overstimulated, and not nearly introspective enough. (Quartz)