The JSE is engaging the sponsors of Christo Wiese’s Titan Group to estbalsih the facts behind the reported placement of 17-million Shoprite shares with institutional investors, JSE ADM Andre Visser said on Wednesday. Black-owned investment group Lebashe plans to sue UDM leader Bantu Holomisa for what it called a “defamatory” and “malicious” open letter he wrote to the Presidency. The DA yesterday suffered a double whammy when the main opposition party failed to get rid of two of their controversial mayors in the Western Cape, Cape Town Mayor Patricia de Lille and Knysna mayor Mark Willemse. READ MORE: She’s back: De Lille triumphs over DA The department of basic education has extended the deadline for the public to comment on changes to school sex education. Veteran politician Mangosuthu Buthelezi has described the call to expropriate land that falls under traditional leadership as the “final nail in the coffin” by the ANC-led government in efforts to disempower traditional leaders. READ MORE: Cosatu’s new KZN leaders take on Ingonyama Sowetan The death of a patient in a maternity ward of a troubled Free State hospital resulted in nurses downing tools, as they demanded more staff to be hired. The woman died after a delay to take her into theatre due to staff shortages. The EFF publicly brags about Johannesburg mayor Herman Mashaba being their own which has not gone down well with Mashaba’s fellow DA councillors and opposition parties who accuse him of dancing to every tune of the red brigade. Cash-strapped Eskom is expected to table its final salary increase offer today after unions unanimously rejected its revised proposal of 5% yesterday. READ MORE: Eskom to reopen negotiations with trade unions, as it warns of constrained supply Court orders state to provide classes for Limpopo school A Limpopo high court judgment ordering the provincial department of education to build classrooms for a school which has been holding classes under a tree has been hailed as a major victory for learners. READ MORE: Section27 calls for end to #EndTreeSchools in Limpopo The cash-strapped Limpopo department of health has tried – and failed – to have nearly R100-million worth of irregular expenditure written off by the provincial treasury earlier this year. The former head of Sars Large Business Centre believes fraud, and a desire to have access to the money her unit handled, was why suspended tax boss Tom Moyane’s “broke” her unit. READ MORE: Employees claim that fear stalked Sars during Moyane’s reign IAAF won’t budge on ‘Caster’ rule Both sides have stood their ground following an apparently futile meeting between Athletics South Africa (ASA) and the International Association of Athletics Federations to discuss international rule changes which affect star athlete Caster Semenya. READ MORE: IAAF, ASA agree court must rule on female classification Daily Sun Confusion is the order of the day at Gauteng’s provincial cop shops but it appears Lieutenant-General Deliwe de Lange is definitely staying out. Alex FM staff members are back at work after the Johannesburg high court overturned the interdict against the staff and ordered them to return to work yesterday. Justice Anthony M. Kennedy announced that he would retire, setting the stage for a furious fight over the future direction of the Supreme Court. His retirement gives President Trump the opportunity to help create a solid five-member conservative majority. (The New York Times) Cuban doctors have specific expertise in dealing with diseases like malaria which remains a major problem in Kenya. (The Conversation)