The National Minimum Wage Bill was submitted to the National Assembly on Tuesday, where it was debated and approved — an effort Labour Minister Mildred Oliphant called “groundbreaking”. Oliphant also presented two other labour Bills — the Basic Conditions of Employment Amendment Bill and the Labour Relations Amendment Bill — that were passed and all three have now been sent to the National Council of Provinces to ratify. The purpose of the national minimum wage, according to the legislation, is to promote “social justice by improving the wages of the lowest-paid workers, protecting workers from unreasonably low wages, and promoting collective bargaining and supporting economic policy”. But the Bill has not been without its detractors, and Oliphant accused MPs, such as the Democratic Alliance’s Michael Bagraim and Thembinkosi Rawula from the Economic Freedom Fighters, of not properly reading the legislation up for debate. The proposed national minimum wage is R20 an hour for the average worker, R18 an hour for farmworkers, R15 an hour for domestic workers and R11 an hour for expanded public works programme workers. The parliamentary labour portfolio committee, which redrafted the Bill after public hearings and input from the labour department, initially recommended that, by 2020, all workers receive the full minimum wage, but this two-year deadline is not reflected in the amendments. The Basic Conditions of Employment Amendment Bill, which includes provisions for enforcing the minimum wage, will uphold wages determined by each sector that are already higher than the national minimum wage. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.