Narrative Means: Artistic works begin with an experience or idea that is then translated into a tangible expression by the artist. Each artist featured in the group exhibition Narrative Means grapples with the tension between perception and meaning.
They include artist, architect and filmmaker Alfredo Jaar, photographer David Goldblatt, and artists Ghada Amer, Reza Farkhondeh, Kendell Geers and William Kentridge. The exhibition hopes to facilitate a heightened encounter between the object produced, the hand that made it and the viewer. Through this exchange, a story unfolds and, with it, new meanings are made. Details: The exhibition runs until July 14 at the Goodman Gallery, 163 Jan Smuts Avenue, Parkwood, Johannesburg. For more information visit goodman-gallery.com In the Forests of the Night: In response to the South African Botanical Art Worldwide Exhibition, this exhibition showcases work by a selection of South African artists. It shows, in a variety of mediums, how artists use botanical elements in their work. Details: Until June 16 at Everard Read, 6 Jellicoe Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg. For more information visit www.everard-read.co.za The Woman with a Baby on Her Back: This one-hander performed by Pieter van Zyl is a stage adaptation of Athol Fugard’s short story To Whom It Must Concern. It portrays the quest of a Karoo train driver after his life is derailed by a tragic event. Details: The hour-long play will be staged until June 16 at Alexander Bar, 76 Strand Street, Cape Town. Tickets are R110 (R100 online). For more information or to buy a ticket visit alexanderbar.co.za Fordsburg Walking Food Tour: Join Gilda Swanepoel, also known as Eenblond, for an eat-and-walk guided tour of Fordsburg in Johannesburg. You will learn about the history and culture of the suburb while setting your taste buds on fire with the street food banquet on offer. Details: The tour takes place on June 16 from 11am to 3pm and begins at City Lodge on Carr Street, Newtown. Tickets cost R450 a person, which includes lunch and two drinks. To book, email eenblondtours@gmail.com and for more information visit eenblond.co.za Capital Craft Beer Festival: Over the past few years the festival has established itself as an indispensable part of the Pretoria social calendar. There will be three music stages, 40 brewers, 200 beers on tap, more than 20 food stalls and opportunities to learn about craft beer. Details: The festival takes place on June 16 at the Pretoria National Botanical Gardens, 2 Cussonia Avenue, Brummeria. Tickets range from R100 to R170 a person and can be purchased from plankton.mobi. Children between the ages of 13 and 17 are not allowed. For more information visit the National Botanical Gardens Facebook page.