The City of Johannesburg, SA’s economic powerhouse, is in a race against time to avoid a takeover by the provincial government after the rejection of the DA’s proposed tariff increases left it unable to pass its R59-billion budget last week. Steinhoff Africa Retail, which itself is seeking to distance itself from its scandal-hit parent, Steinhoff International, has met with Johann Rupert’s Remgro to sound it out as a potential investor. The SA Communist Party has declared a new war on former president Jacob Zuma, accusing him of being at the heart of a pushback against the ANC leadership and state capture. READ MORE: JZ’s apostles to launch new party Several major development companies have been named and shamed by the City of Jo’burg after they were allegedly caught stealing water and electricity. The SA Medical Association warns the province is heading for disaster amid news that all provincial departments will collectively foot the R160-million bill awarded to families in the Esidimeni tragedy. The party is in a serious identity crisis that could cost it votes in the 2019 election. Deaths and amputations are on the rise due to users injecting the concoction into the blood stream. Ria Ledwaba was voted in as the first woman vice-president of the South African Football Association in a national council meeting of the association on Sunday. Bongani went to bed with a widow two months after her husband’s death. Now, Bongani believes, the woman’s late husband is angry and his is making him suffer because he did not wait. Organisers are using the slogan “Resist Authoritarianism” to mark the wide-sweeping event, which will also pay tribute to Chinese dissident and Nobel laureate Liu Xiaobo.
As many as 150 000 people are expected to attend a candlelight vigil. (South China Morning Post) Planning is at early stages and no formal approach has been made, according to the Financial Times, but both sides are looking into the possibility. With such a move the two players would lead the way for banking mergers on the continent. (Reuters) Residents chose to stay without power, cell reception, or county water as the volcano continued to threaten their community. Officials say the last holdouts will be airlifted to safety. (CNN) Denmark’s Parliament will soon have to consider a proposal to ban circumcision of boys under 18 in order to protect “children’s fundamental rights.” (The New York Times)