Former finance minister Pravin Gordhan was ignored when he asked for information on the new operating model at the South African Revenue Services. READ MORE: SARS did not need to be restructured ― Gordhan Old Mutual Ltd’s share price was mostly a sad match for the thunder of vuvuzelas that welcomed the 173-year-old firm’s JSE listing at a ceremony on Tuesday. UDM president Bantu Holomisa has written an explosive letter to President Ramaphosa fingering prominent business people as responsible for large scale corruption at the PIC. Soccer legend Jomo Sono has introduced a new device that can track any gun There have been two more initiation deaths in Eastern Cape, bringing the total to seven since the start of the season a week ago. Italian prime minister Giuseppe Conte said he will allow a ship filled with migrants to dock in his country READ MORE: Spain gives refuge after Italy’s Trump-approved prime minister rejects migrants The Citizen Alexandra Taxi Association spokesperson Jabulani Ntshangase says that they have not reached “the mountain top” until they get what they want – their own dedicated taxi lane. The Hawks are hovering above municipal managers and chief financial officers in Gauteng, North West and Limpopo who invested funds to the tune of R1.5-billion with VBS Mutual Bank. The man that the police had pinned their hopes on for information about the spate of killings on the West Rand has died, bringing the death toll to four. Joburg mayor Herman Mashaba was left seething after a desperate taxi owner escaped arrest when he produced “fraudulent” papers to officials to allow the release of his impounded vehicle. A well-known accountant-cum-political commentator Khaya Sithole is fighting back against claims that he cost an organisations millions of rands when he allegedly forged a letter giving bursaries to more than 200 students. READ MORE: Explosive Khaya Sithole affidavit casts shadow over Saica Bodies continue to pile up at Sibanye-Stillwater mining group after another mineworker died yesterday at its Khomanani mine. A California law requiring “crisis pregnancy centers” to supply women with information about abortion was blocked in a 5-4 decision. (The New York Times) President Trump took aim at one of his favorite American manufacturers, Harley-Davidson, threatening the company with steep punitive taxes.
(The New York Times) Companies, such as Google, Facebook and Microsoft are working together to take down terrorist propaganda. (The Conversation)