The KwaZulu-Natal provincial government appears to be on a collision course with the national government about the latter’s intention to give land tenure to residents living on tribal-controlled land under the administration of the Ingonyama Trust Board. The provincial government wants King Goodwill Zwelithini, the sole trustee of the Ingonyama Trust, to maintain control of three million hectares of tribal land in the province, but the central government wants to scrap the board and introduce individual land tenure for rural communities. Days after KwaZulu-Natal Premier Willies Mchunu apologised to Zwelithini for plans to scrap the trust, Deputy President David Mabuza made it clear that draft legislation before Parliament would enforce individual land tenure rights and not leave the control of this land with traditional leaders. The premier wants to call his own provincial land summit and has accused Parliament’s high-level panel, which has recommended that the trust be scrapped, of undermining the king and failing to consult his government. Mchunu last Friday distanced his administration and the ANC from comments by former president Kgalema Motlanthe — who heads the panel — at the recent ANC land summit and apologised to the Zulu monarch. Motlanthe said that the land would no longer be controlled by chiefs who acted like “dictators’’. Mchunu has repeatedly stated that his administration would not support any moves that “undermine’’ the king and used last Friday’s address to slate Motlanthe for his comments. At the same event, Zwelithini and traditional leaders from the province threatened “war’’ if the plan to give tenure to individual communities went ahead. Mabuza, in response to questions in the National Assembly on Tuesday, said that the draft Communal Land Tenure Bill, which will go before Parliament in the near future, would end “conflicting views’’ that traditional land belonged to the chiefs. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.