Qwitha by Lungiswa Gqunta: Working primarily with found materials — empty beer bottles, torn sheets and worn wooden bedframes — Gqunta’s work confronts the viewer with a series of uncomfortable negotiations. Details: The exhibition is at Whatiftheworld, 16 Buiten Street, Cape Town, until June 16.
For more information visit whatiftheworld.com Encounters South African International Documentary Festival: The first Encounters took place in 1999, screened 24 films and sold just over 2 000 tickets. Two decades on and it has firmly established itself as the premier non-fiction film festival on the continent. The focus of this year’s selection is the power of womanhood, reflected by the fact that more than half of the 40 films selected have female directors and many centre on women who have made an indelible mark on history from former public protector Thuli Madonsela and British-Sri Lankan singer-songwriter and activist M.I.A. to British fashion designer Vivienne Westwood. Details: Encounters runs until June 10. Tickets cost R60 and are available from webtickets.co.za. The festival is at V&A Waterfront’s Ster-Kinekor Cinema Nouveau in Cape Town and the Rosebank Mall Cinema Nouveau in Johannesburg. For more information visit encounters.co.za Soweto Art & Craft Fair: This monthly fair is a platform for local artists, designers and craftsmen to make sales at an affordable price. Details: Saturday June 2. Entrance fee is R20 a person but a cooler box of food and drink will be an additional R60. The event is at the Soweto Theatre, on the corner of Bolani and Bolani Links roads, Jabulani. For more information visit sowetotheatre.com CLOSE: The exhibition interrogates tension as a critical moment of reflection on the liminal spaces between things and beings, sex and desire. It features works by 11 artists from Africa and the African diaspora including Lungiswa Gqunta, Yaye Kassamali, Stacey Gillian Abe, Lady Skollie, Athi-Patra Ruga, Neo Musangi, and James Muriuki. Details: The exhibition is at the Johannesburg Art Gallery, on the of corner Klein and King George streets, Joubert Park. It runs until June 24. Visit kauru.co.za for more information