Old Mutual’s anticipated return to South Africa is being welcomed by investors who believe it will be able to compete better with rival Sanlam. Old Mutual Limited (OML), the group’s local holding company, will list on the JSE on June 26. The insurer is splitting its four financial-services businesses — Old Mutual Emerging Markets, the Nedbank Group, Old Mutual Wealth and Old Mutual Asset Management — into stand-alone entities. Old Mutual Emerging Markets, its Africa-based insurance and asset-management businesses, will fall under the newly formed South African holding company, OML. Analysts such as Avior Capital’s Warwick Bam expect OML to trade much closer to that of Sanlam. On Tuesday, Old Mutual Plc was trading at R40.34 on the JSE and Sanlam at R81.20. Old Mutual Plc first announced its “managed separation plan” in March 2016, estimating at the time that the new structure’s benefits for shareholders could reach more than £2-billion. Bruce Hemphill, when he took over as group chief executive in November 2015, developed the strategy to stimulate the group’s profitability and raise its share price, which many believed was lagging behind. The Old Mutual Plc board, currently headquartered in London, believed that the group’s structure had locked value. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.