Words like “abolish” featured prominently in Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi’s announcement of the long-awaited National Health Insurance (NHI) Bill and the Medical Schemes Amendment Bill last week. His statement suggested that, in addition to a mammoth overhaul of the entire medical aid scheme system, brokers and health insurance products — such as hospital cash plans — will be jettisoned. But health industry and insurance experts point out that the draft Bills are not as definitive on these issues, nor is it clear how numerous other changes would be achieved. Notably, the NHI Bill says little about a critical question — how an overarching national health insurance scheme will be paid for. In his announcement, Motsoaledi said one of the aims of the Medical Schemes Amendment Bill was “to abolish the practice of using brokers within the medical schemes environment”. He cited the fees that medical aid brokers charge (R90 a month) and the amount paid to brokers in 2017, which reached R2.2-billion. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.