Cash-strapped power utility Eskom is heading for a showdown with unions in the second round of wage talks as it sticks to its stance of no pay increase. It has been more than three months since the Constitutional Court heard argument on whether Shaun Abrahams should remain the head of the National Prosecuting Authority and there is still no certainty on when the court will announce its ruling. READ MORE: Justice minister has ‘full confidence’ in Abrahams Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane is on the ropes and could be the first public protector in more than 23 years to face a parliamentary inquiry, to probe her conduct. READ MORE: MPs fume as Mkhwebane requests late postponement of meeting For the third time in a decade, South Africa is set to be voted on to the UN Security Council as a non-permanent member tomorrow. The ruling party suspects that former president Jacob Zuma — despite his denials — is “highly involved” in a plot to launch a breakaway political party. READ MORE: JZ’s apostles to launch new party Loving dad inconsolable after accidentally shooting his son dead at school, fearing he was being hijacked. READ MORE: Lesufi to visit Ennerdale school shooting site Somizi Mhlongo has asked his followers to track down the person who allegedly tweeted a racial slur. Taking aim at so-called fake news, France’s Parliament on Thursday is set to begin debating a tough bill aimed at repressing phony news items, one pushed by President Emmanuel Macron amid criticism that it poses a potential threat to press freedom. (The New York Times) It’s not uncommon to have meteorites slamming into the earth.
To scientists, these space rocks can reveal the stories of planets and asteroids. But some people see them as small fortunes. (Quartz) Women outnumber men in Spain PM Sánchez’s new cabinet Spain’s Socialist Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez has given 11 of his 17 cabinet posts to women, a higher proportion than anywhere else in Europe. (BBC) In the future, you could find yourself booking an Emirates flight without a real window seat. The airline has just unveiled a new first class suite on board its latest aircraft that features “virtual windows” instead of real ones. (ABC News)