THE READING LIST Women in Southern Africa edited by Christine Qunta (Allison & Busby): The idea of African women being conscious of patriarchy has been portrayed as something that arose when they came into contact with Western women but I’m not sure about that. So, when Mme Christine Qunta told me about this collection of women’s accounts, dating as far back as 1500 BC, I was captured.
The book was first published in 1978 but Qunta began working on it while in exile in Australia, where the dominant idea of feminism was European. Unfortunately, it has been out of print for some years so getting a copy was not easy. (ZH) Boots Riley’s review of BlacKkKlansman: I appreciate Boots Riley because by just being, he throws up a lot of fault lines in pop culture. Some time ago, The Guardian called his review of BlacKkKlansman “an attack” on director Spike Lee. Once again Boots had to defend his views. I’d be interested in seeing where other reviewers take it and, of course, to see Sorry to Bother You, directed by Riley, when it lands. (KS) THE PLAY LIST Giant Feelings by Brandon Coleman: Brandon Coleman’s Giant Feelings is a fat dollop of free soul, if there is such a thing. In my estimation, you take a Parliament-Funkadelic-type slow strut anchored by drummer Techdizzle and you add some human sunshine in the form of Patrice Quinn singing the simplest of declarations. Top it all off with a bunch of tweaking synths and punchy horns and, suddenly, the Earth is no longer such a terrible place. (KS) On Being with Krista Tippett —The Spirituals with Joe Carter: It’s been a long time since a conversation has touched me in the way that this beloved one did. Recorded before he died of cancer at the age of 57, Tippett’s rich and divergent conversation with musician Joe Carter was an education.Carter is generous in his storytelling about the African roots of African-American spirituals, which later went on to influence the blues, gospel and American soul music. Detailing an unknown history of music and slavery, while stopping to play some of the songs on a piano accompanied by a monumental voice — this is the best-quality listening a hungry soul could ask for. (MB) The Lists were compiled by Milisuthando Bongela, Kwanele Sosibo, and Zaza Hlalethwa