A multimillion-rand contract between Medscheme and the Road Accident Fund (RAF) is at the centre of an investigation after a whistle-blower alleged close personal ties between officials of both entities. At the end of 2013, when the RAF faced a growing backlog of claims, the board decided to partially outsource the administration and settlement of some of the outstanding claims, which gave birth to Project Siyenza. The project, which came to an end last year, was controversial from the start, with many critics asking why millions were being spent on outsourcing work when the fund should have had the capacity to do the work itself. Only two service providers qualified for the tender — Medscheme and a consortium consisting of EY and A2A Kopano. Now a whistle-blower’s complaint to the fund last year has brought to light that there was possibly a problem with how Medscheme was awarded its part of a contract that has seen the company pocketing more than R130-million for completing less than 50% of the cases it was given. According to the whistle-blower, the RAF’s head of the legal division at the time, Charlene Louw, sat on the tender adjudicating boards. The whistle-blower states that Louw is married to Tim Rametse, who is the managing director of AfroCentric Health Solutions, which wholly owns Medscheme. “Louw did not declare the relationship. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.