The red meat industry is already feeling the effects of a nationwide recall of certain ready-to-eat meat products linked to the listeriosis outbreak that has led to the deaths of 183 people so far. As products such as polony and viennas have been pulled from retail shelves, meat processing and manufacturing have slowed dramatically and jobs are already being lost, according to the Red Meat Industry Forum. Although the feedback from the industry is still only preliminary, the manufacturing of processed meats is down by roughly 50%, according to the forum’s general manager, Michelle de Lange. Retail sales of processed meats, meanwhile, were down by about 80%, said De Lange.  This is when comparing last week’s sales to those recorded the week before the March 4 press briefing by Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi on the source of the outbreak. Motsoaledi announced that the government had found the Listeria monocytogenes bacteria, which causes listeriosis, at plants belonging to Enterprise Foods and RCL Foods Limited, and initiated a national recall of certain products. Motsoaledi also revealed that the specific strain of the bacteria — ST6 — which has been identified as the cause of this listeriosis outbreak, was found at Enterprise’s plant in Polokwane. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.