Counter allegations of fraud and corruption are playing themselves out in court between the SABC and the losing bidder of a R185-million security tender. Former Proteas captain Graeme Smith has hit out at the one-match ban given to Australian captain Steve Smith, saying the ICC has “missed a chance to lead the game”. Building industry regulators have denied Joburg mayor Herman Mashaba’s assertion that they were shielding a property developer. There is a lot of evil in this school and we are here to stop it! These were the words of one of the pastors who gathered for a prayer session at a school that is besieged with child abuse. Families of the people killed in the Lowveld massacre in 1986 still want closure.  The sex scandal hanging over Safa president Danny Jordaan’s head is not going away. The Treasury will ask government departments to look at what each of them can do to lift SA’s credit ratings and take advantage of the opportunity Moody’s opened up when it surprised the market on Friday night by upgrading the outlook on SA’s ratings to “stable” from “negative”. Naspers is considering spending up to $2.4-billion on buying out minority shareholders of certain portfolio companies, says CEO Bob van Dijk Australia’s ball-tampering crisis in their Test series in SA hit the national conversation on Sunday when Prime Minister Malcom Turnbull laid into Steve Smith’s side. A contract dispute between the Department of Justice and publisher Juta has resulted in judges being locked out from accessing Juta’s content, on which they rely as an archive of judgements and legal commentary. A North West police station commander and his officers were apparently at the scene when a man suspected of murdering and robbing an old woman was forced to kill himself by hanging. This years South African Film and TV Awards saw younger actors take centre. Safa says the law will take its course after an ex ANC MP laid a charge of rape against the soccer body’s president, Danny Jordaan. Australian cricket was in a shambles last night― both off and on the field Labour unions intend taking action against the private sector if the gender pay gap issue in South Africa is not urgently addressed. After being allowed back in cinemas following the Film and Publication Board’s reconsideration of its porn rating, critically acclaimed film Inxeba has swept up the Saftas. Thousands of poor Johannesburg residents are being denied their basic right to free water ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule says there is no reason to panic over the ruling party’s plans to expropriate land without compensation.