When an experienced and respected writer sent me a story she was submitting to the Mail & Guardian, with a note for me to please credit a young writer for the former’s use of a general linguistic term, one that does not belong to the younger writer but to the English language, I knew that we are living in dangerous times for creativity, critical thought and art. This writer, a black feminist, was afraid of what the black feminists on Twitter would think if she did not credit another black feminist writer for a term that is as general as “couch potato”. What does it mean if one of our best thinkers is writing in a context of the fear of being dragged, and writing less because of an irascible internet culture that few can to admit to, let alone openly discuss, for fear of being dragged themselves? In South Africa, fighting occupies the space between everything. Whenever I hear a member of my generation or somebody younger say something like: “I’m tired of explaining racism to white people” or “It’s exhausting to have to do the work of talking to men about patriarchy”, I understand this sentiment of fatigue. Another popular statement I’ve heard people knife into conversations with surgical zeal is: “It’s [clapping emoji] not [clapping emoji] my [clapping emoji] job [clapping emoji] to [clapping emoji] educate [insert group] about [insert subject].” While straightening the backs of lazy bigots, this line can also reverse any earnest morsel of curiosity from a well-meaning but unknowing person, pushing them back into the trenches of ignorance. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.