Tiger Brands is recalling yet another batch of products, a move that could cost it up to R800-million, twice the R324-million in operating profit generated by its snacks, treats and beverages division for the financial year to end-September. Shopping mall owner Hammerson plc says it will not be derailed by an opportunistic share and cash takeover proposal by France’s Klépierre, claiming it undervalues the JSE-listed retail real-estate investment trust’s assets. Retired deputy chief justice Dikgang Moseneke lashed out at former top officials of the Gauteng health department on Monday, saying that those entrusted with the lives of vulnerable patients had skirted their responsibilities, resulting in the death of at least 144 psychiatric patients. South African Revenue Service (SARS) commissioner Tom Moyane is digging in his heels and has refused to resign. Moseneke awards families R1.2-million each, but laments hidden “ulterior motives” behind former health MEC Mahlangu’s decisions on Esidimeni. Tears of relief and joy spread through the court yesterday as retired deputy chief justice Dikgang Moseneke read his report. Former Gauteng health MEC Qedani Mahlangu is far from being off the hook, after a damning judgment that opened the floodgates for tough action to be taken against her for her role in the Life Esidimeni tragedy that killed 144 psychiatric patients. A billionaire pastor and businessman accused of bribing the ANC Youth League is at the centre of another damaging scandal that ended in a court defeat yesterday. This year Human Rights Day returns to its roots in Sharpeville. The constitutional rights of society’s most vulnerable, psychiatric patients, and their families were violated in the most cruel and inhumane way. The Gauteng health department was slapped with a nearly R200-million rebuke when it was yesterday ordered to pay the families in the Life Esidimeni arbitration R1-million each for constitutional damages, among other awards. But the total bill could possible reach well over R2-billion.