The financial sector has come under fire again for its slow pace of transformation, with the Association of Black Securities and Investment Professionals (Absip) saying it wants the sector to be more reflective of South Africa’s demographics. “Asijiki … as Absip we will not turn back on our belief that the financial services sector should be radically transformed to become a vibrant, globally competitive industry,” said the president of the association, Sibongiseni Mbatha. Absip has turned its focus to the youth, women, advocacy, thought leadership and financial sustainability to further promote transformation. A survey by 27four Investment Managers, which measures transformation in the financial sector, says that, of the R4.6-trillion industry assets, only R415.5-billion — or 9% — is managed by black firms. Women make up a mere 45% of 586 employees employed in the industry, according to the survey. Absip notes that, in the 2017 Financial Mail ranking, of the 465 stockbroker analysts who participated in the survey, only 18% were women and 14% were black. Business Leadership South Africa (BLSA) has supported the call for more transformation of the sector, saying it resonates with its strategy, which includes inclusive socioeconomic growth, gender equity and equality. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.