Writing in 1995 for a unanimous Constitutional Court, Judge Ismail Mahomed expressed reservations about constitutional amendments on the grounds of principle. A constitutional amendment may comply with the formal procedures, he said, but, where it “radically and fundamentally restructures and re-organises” the fundamental premises of the Constitution, it would not qualify as an amendment at all and hence would be unconstitutional. The jurisprudential logic of the proposition was simple enough: the power to amend the Constitution did not include the power to abrogate the Constitution. Attractive as the formulation was, it raised the question: What are the “fundamental premises” of the Constitution, which, if altered, amounted to abrogation and not amendment? Citing a precedent of the Indian Supreme Court, Mahomed postulated four elements, which he termed “basic features” of the Constitution: the rule of law, the principle of equality, the independence of the judiciary and judicial review. Mahomed’s formulation was never adopted by the Constitutional Court. When the United Democratic Movement (UDM) challenged a constitutional amendment, which enabled politicians to retain their parliamentary seats despite changing their political parties, the court dismissed the application, finding it unnecessary to pass comment on the contentious topic of amendments that would “abrogate or destroy the Constitution”. The proposed amendments to section 25 (the property clause) of the Constitution do not abrogate or destroy the basic structure of the Constitution. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.