Without the spectre of Jacob Zuma smiling beatifically over the National Assembly, opposition parties are struggling to get the better of the ANC. The Economic Freedom Fighter’s (EFF) dogged determination to have its most radical ideas implemented as government policies reminds the ANC of what it ought to be, of what it has failed to do. The EFF has become the revolutionary vanguard of the ANC, while the Democratic Alliance, dazed and confused, has resorted to a crude campaign of swart gevaar. It has been a long, long time since the ANC had the upper hand in a political performance that did not require a simple enforcement of their majority but the current alignment of the ruling party has forced the opposition to concede ground to the ANC. There could be no more true indication of this new politics than events in the National Assembly this week, when EFF leader Julius Malema, who in the Zuma era was better known for stinging one-line jabs and rousing the parliamentary security personnel, stood to beam approvingly at an ANC president. “That is being presidential,” Malema said in praise of Cyril Ramaphosa on Wednesday. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.