As much as Not in My Neighbourhood is a film that takes it viewers to the frontlines of the global battle against dispossession, police brutality and gentrification, it is not a dour or aesthetically limited film. In fact, it may perk you up a little, correct your posture and have you looking at that new neighbourhood development with new eyes. Directed, written and partly shot by filmmaker Kurt Orderson, it weaves a thread between three locales — Cape Town, São Paulo and Brooklyn (New York) — creating an intercontinental dialogue that highlights the similarities and connections between disparate diasporic struggles. Orderson, who was born in Cape Town and now lives in New Orleans, first came across the term gentrification when he saw graffiti in Harlem: “Gentrifiers, get out of our neighbourhood.” This film is an expression of how he has come to understand this complex issue; its ties to capitalism, racism and spatial planning. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.