Ke na le modisa, ke tla be ke hlokang? Ke ya ipitsang Jehovah, molimo o phelang O nkisa botaleng, lijong tse mphelisang O nkalosa dinokaneng, metsing a nkholisang  The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want; He make me to lie down in pastures green; He leads me beside the still waters; And he restoreth my soul. This hymn raised me. It cleaned the blood off my knees when I fell and scraped them and it soothed my gasps and racing heart after a nightmare of Pinky Pinky running after me in the grade two bathroom. This hymn squeezed my hand tightly when my dad’s coffin slowly inched its way down into the hole and I wanted to run and jump in with it and this hymn looked at me with pride pouring down her cheeks when I got accepted into university with my tuition paid in full. This hymn is my mom and my mom is this hymn. Whenever I think of my mom, Anna Masarese Kekana, I smell the warm sweet vanilla scent of baked dikuku or scones, and I see her leaning over the table, rolling dough into a ball, flattening out the gooey goodness on to the table, which is sprinkled with flour — nothing irritates her more than dough sticking on to the surface — and cutting it into shapes to prepare the second tray, while humming Ke na le modisa without pause. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.