A council allegedly gave work to branch members in return for backing NDZ at the party conference Long before red flags were raised, this family fell victim to listeriosis. And tragedy has struck again A year after they were retrenched by Rainbow Chickens at the height of the dumped-chicken crisis, life is bleak for the bulk of the 1 300 workers who lost their jobs. Her cellphone records were obtained in a bid by the rail regulator to find a whistle-blower This week Lucas Ledwaba writes about women in Limpopo’s Sekhukhune district who have used the land to improve their lives Cosatu turns on Cyril about VAT Besides wanting more goods to be zero-rated, the federation is upping public sector wage demands Hopes for unity are further complicated by divisions in the anti-Magashule branches Mineral Resources Minister Gwede Mantashe has moved to settle disagreements about mining legislation and push through the Mining Charter and the Mineral Petroleum Resources Development Amendment Bill within five months. The party wants to alter its constitution to allow it to recall office bearers found to oppose its policies “Don’t give land to people who don’t know how to use it; give it to people who you have prepared” ‘You start to realise that people are really scared; it’s a fear that in every relationship something is going to go wrong and it’s going to end.’ Public watchdogs are dismayed that the Moerane inquiry’s findings, like others, won’t be released A multimillion-rand contract between Medscheme and the Road Accident Fund (RAF) is at the centre of an investigation after a whistle-blower alleged close personal ties between officials of both entities. It’s feared that ditching the Ingonyama Trust Board could plunge the province into violence The head of the National Institute for Communicable Diseases’ listeria investigation, Juno Thomas, tells us which foods to bin and how. Twenty-thousand Zimbabweans were slaughtered in a brutal purge of Mugabe’s perceived opponents.
Mnangagwa played a role in organising the crackdown Three years and one regime later, Itai Dzamara’s family is still waiting for information about his fate Crops such as fonio, a plant indigenous to West Africa, rather than those planted for export, are being grown to fight hunger and climate change “There are complaints from the opposition that the ruling party’s partisans are stuffing ballots” Enterprise Foods barred health officials twice so the police were summoned for the third attempt The regulations and management of food safety standards need to be overhauled, say experts The banks are fighting shy of the politically hot companies, putting business rescue in jeopardy Nersa has told Eskom it cannot pass cost increases on to consumers. Rather, it will be expected to cut operational costs and inefficiencies Following several reports, it has again been criticised for not transforming enough Despite many African governments having signed and ratified that bible for African feminists, the Maputo Protocol, which, in article 3, affords women the right to dignity, little action is taken on the ground about violence against women. In Hollywood, it is always a season of firsts, and a reason to try out a new hashtag The play is the dissection of a homogenised blackness. Kudu at once foregrounds the antagonism, erasure and ignorance surrounding the Khoi heritage, while questioning the legacy of prominent groupings in the country such as AmaXhosa. A portrait of the enigmatic but gifted jazz cat and artist is conjured through the eyes of photographer (and admirer) Tseliso Monaheng “I thought, if life isn’t just for humans — like it runs through animals and everything — then if I carry on eating animals then I’m basically eating souls. So I decided I don’t want to do that anymore. So I started looking into veganism and I realised there’s no way I’m not eating my favourite dessert.” The filmmaker’s focus on the banal and routine drew attention to the people, their languages and practices A collection of short stories flirts with surrealism in its rendering of the complex South African condition Sometimes you discover that people you expect to be stuck in the past are in sync with the future Any amendment must be constitutional, which means certain principles must be adhered to By attacking people’s basic plea for dignity, the war King Zwelithini threatens is really on the people he claims to lead and protect. For migrants who have watched the Gupta citizenship saga over the past week, rage does not begin to describe their feelings. The purgatory of home affairs saw me playing the journo card but at least I feel guilty about it Intra-elite contestation on land seldom takes the often bitter struggles of the urban poor seriously And the Oscar for best orgasm depicted in a biopic goes to … Kagure Mugo “I don’t think that you are,” says Fish Paste. “I heard polonies are disappearing all over. It’s a genocide; ethnic cleansing if I ever saw it. Polonies, viennas, frankfurters. If you’re cold meat, buddy, you’re toast” The campaign for free higher education fails to consider who actually pays for it Exuberant communications manager Vina Maphosa is committed to promoting Amakhosi This crazy athlete from Down Under wants to break borders between people and eradicate hate The new Bok coach’s six-year contract and close bond with his bosses have some crying ‘jobs for pals’