Human Rights Festival: The three-day event at Constitution Hill in Johannesburg includes debates, art, culture, exhibitions, books, poetry, comedy, film, music and a food and designer-makers market. The event is in memory of those who fought for democracy, including those in the Sharpeville Massacre of March 21 1960.
The festival highlights the work of social justice organisations, the importance of civic activism and the constitutional values and principles of equality, justice, freedom and dignity. Details: The festival at 11 Kotze Street, Braamfontein, runs from March 23 to 25. Entry is free after registering online at constitutionhill.org.za/human-rights-festival Inner Dimensions Collective by Nduduzo Makhathini: The award-winning project, which brings together noteworthy musicians from South Africa and Switzerland, starts its first Southern African tour at The Orbit in Johannesburg. The project was recorded at Musikerwohnhaus in Basel, Switzerland, during his residency facilitated by Pro Helvetia Johannesburg in 2016. Details: The event is at The Orbit, 81 De Korte Street, Braamfontein, on Sunday March 25 and costs R150 a person. For bookings call 011 339 6645 or 081 534 2867 or email info@theorbit.co.za Speechless by rosenclaire: The exhibition, by Rose Shakinovsky and Claire Gavronsky, questions the power of words to represent and relate to our surroundings. Shakinovsky’s semiabstract prints are of recent natural disasters and social upheavals such as London’s Grenfell Towers fire, Syrian refugees, wildfires and floods. Gavronsky’s pastels include a deflated colonial figure, a mapping of technological change where people and natural resources are exploited. Details: The exhibition runs until April 6 at the Goodman Gallery, 3rd Floor, Fairweather House, 176 Sir Lowry Road, Foreshore, Cape Town. For more information visit goodman-gallery.com The 19th Cape Town International Jazz Festival: It’s the largest music event in sub-Saharan Africa and this year more than 40 artists will perform over two nights. They include Nduduzo Makhathini, Mulatu Astatke, Miles Mosley, Corinne Bailey Rae, Blinky Bill and Sibot, Mabuta, The Surge, Amanda Black and MiCasa. Details: The festival is on March 23 to 24 at the Cape Town International Convention Centre. Tickets start at R750 a person. For more information visit capetownjazzfest.com Speaking the Unspeakable by Grada Kilomba: The psychologist, interdisciplinary artist and writer is presenting her first solo exhibition on the continent. Using storytelling, performance, text collages and video and sound installations, Kilomba explores the intricacies between speaking, silencing and listening, creating a space in which previously silenced voices can speak “the unspeakable” about the ongoing trauma of colonialism. Details: The exhibition at the Goodman Gallery, 163 Jan Smuts Avenue, Parkwood, Johannesburg, runs until April 12. For more information visit goodman-gallery.com Gogo Speaks — Love & Legacy: Sangoma Nokulinda Mkhize and her husband Tim Horwood share practical guidance from isintu for relationships and families. The event will include a panel discussion and Q&A at which Mkhize will be in conversation with Nokwe Mtshali and Dr Nomalanga Mkhize on topics ranging from single parenthood, postpartum depression, personal politics and the community complexities in urban, black parenthood experiences. Details: On March 24 at The Joburg Theatre’s The Fringe. Tickets are R280 from webtickets.co.za or for R300 at the door. For more information visit joburgtheatre.com