Time of the Writer festival: The University of KwaZulu-Natal’s Centre for Creative Arts is hosting the 21st Time of the Writer International Festival, featuring about 20 writers from South Africa, Africa and abroad. This year’s line-up includes Nigerian novelist Ayòbámi Adébáyò, Lesego Rampolokeng, Yewande Omotoso, Mohale Mashigo, Patrick Bond and Sizwe Mpofu-Walsh.
Details: Until March 17 at UKZN’s Elizabeth Sneddon Theatre, Durban. Visit cca.ukzn.ac.za or email cca@ukzn.ac.za Ngale KweNdlu: The Other Side of the House: The Windybrow Theatre in Hillbrow has witnessed riches, ruin, abandonment and rebirth. Built by one of Johannesburg’s pioneer families, this historic building has been a home, a boarding house, a place of refuge and a nursing home. The mansion has survived three threats of demolition yet continues to stand as a theatre and arts centre. Ngale KweNdlu: The Other Side of the House delves into the history of the Windybrow. Details: From March 17 to 25 at the Windybrow Theatre, corner of Nugget and Pieterson streets, Hillbrow, Johannesburg. Tickets range from R40 to R80. Visit markettheatre.co.za #The4thMovement: The Orbit jazz club is celebrating four years of existence with an anniversary festival dubbed #The4thMovement. Organiser Sibongakonke Mama says the celebration will look back at the past four years through performances by the likes of Sibongile Khumalo, Feya Faku, Thandiswa Mazwai and McCoy Mrubata. Details: Until March 18 at The Orbit, 81 De Korte Street, Braamfontein, Johannesburg, with daily themes. Visit theorbit.co.za Angola: Through drama, music and dance, Angola celebrates the anonymous people who gave up everything in their quest for liberation and who are not found in any history books. The story follows friends Zakhele, Majoro and Mavuso, who left South Africa to join the armed struggle in Angola. Details: Until March 25 at the Arena, State Theatre, Pretoria. Tickets are R80. Visit statetheatre.co.za Dance Umbrella festival: The Dance Umbrella was established 30 years ago to offer a free, open platform for all contemporary dance forms. This year the festival presents 18 programmes of contemporary dance works by both local and international choreographers. Details: Until March 18 at various venues and theatres in Johannesburg. Tickets range from R80 to R150. Visit danceforumsouthafrica.co.za or call 011 673 0035.