Notorous pyramid scheme mastermind Sibusiso Radebe has struck again and vanished with the hard-earned cash of 2000 fortune seekers, including pensioners, who fell for his latest con. Steve Smith, David Warner and Cameron Bancroft were thrown out of the Australian team touring South Africa yesterday, and ordered to return home. Joburg Mayor Herman Mashaba has been implicated in a conflict of interest scandal that could cost the city R11m in ratepayers’ money. Business Day Ratings agency S&P Global injected a note of reality into the ratings optimism on Tuesday, reminding SA that though February’s budget was much better that October’s medium-term budget, the deficit and debt projections were still worse than in 2017 Prasa says the R3.9bn contracts it awarded to keep dozens of railway station safe were unauthorised, unlawful, defined by alleged tender-rigging and largely, a waste of money. A whipsaw two months on the stock market and the attention of activist short-sellers Viceroy Research has not stopped South Africans from opening Capitec accounts. Ajay and Atul Gupta, former SAA board chair Dudu Myeni and Duduzani Zuma could face jail if they ignore summonses to appear before an inquiry into state capture at state-owned enterprises. Cosatu yesterday said it was disappointed that Parliament and the government would not be ready to implement the long delayed national minimum wage by May 1. A highly anticipated youth employment initiative, in response to a cry for increased opportunities and government support, has finally taken off. ANC SG Ace Magashule has instructed government workers in Bloemfontein to leave work by 9am today to attend his R20-million farewell party. A man who stabbed four siblings to death and cut off their ears, burst into tears when he was sentenced to four life terms in prison by the KZN High Court yesterday. The government has spent more than R50-billion on land restitution claims since 1994. It seems that as the heat turns up for those involved in state capture, threats against those fighting for the country are on the increase. Popular actress Lele Ledwaba cried and prayed after her attacker was found guilty in court yesterday. More than half a million children in South Africa, some as young as seven, are being used for child labour. The political Party Funding Bill, which was passed yesterday by Parliament was long overdue according to an ANC member.