Environmental health officials from the Capricorn district municipality had to ask for police assistance to gain access to the Enterprise Foods manufacturing plant in Polokwane, which has been named as the source of the listeriosis outbreak. According to the municipal manager, Nokuthula Mazibuko, she received a report that the officials had been refused access to the factory so, on February 2, she requested police assistance. This corroborates claims by a well-placed government official, who said local health inspectors were twice refused access to the factory and that police were present when a large delegation of government officials and international medical experts visited the plant on February 2. The Mail & Guardian has not been able to establish the date of the first attempt to inspect the plant but the second was on January 31, the source said. The February 2 delegation, which included a representative from the national department of health, local and provincial officials and officials from the National Institute of Communicable Diseases (NICD), the department of agriculture, forestry and fisheries and the World Health Organisation, took environmental and food samples. According to the source, because local officials had previously been denied access, the police were asked to accompany the delegation. After about a 30-minute wait, the delegation was allowed to enter the plant without needing the police to accompany them. Lawrence MacDougall, the chief executive of Tiger Brands, which owns Enterprise Foods, said the company was not aware that the official was denied access on January 31 and apologised for this. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.