Tragedy first struck when Palesa disappeared in 2013. Three years later, Palesa was identified when her remains were found in a shallow grave. At the release of the ANC’s conference resolutions yesterday, secretary general Ace Magashule said they are committed to dealing with land dispossession. Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane is ready to share documents relating to state capture with deputy chief justice Raymond Zondo as he prepares for the upcoming judicial commission of inquiry. Eskom can apply for another increase to cover shortfall in income but experts claim parastatal’s mismanagement and corruption force the taxpayer to foot the bill. The Gupta brothers will reportedly have to explain how they “amassed” 120 properties in India. The ANC has assured South Africans that the land reform programme would be conducted in an orderly manner. A police captain who allegedly shot a woman several times before killing her over church money was ordered by the court yesterday to stop delaying his murder trial. Mpumalanga premier Refilwe Mtsweni has vowed to fight the killing of people with albinism ANC secretary general Ace Magashule and his deputy, Jessie Duarte, have come under fire for pushing for the dissolution of the pro-President Cyril Ramaphosa EC ANC provincial executive committee. German investment group Aton on Monday announced a R4.7-billion cash offer for Murray & Roberts, bypassing management and causing the share price to rocket more than 50% on Monday. The Gauteng government is to set up a “water war room” by June 2018 to avoid a water crisis in the province, according to the government publication SAnews.gov.za SA was prepared to negotiate a quota for its steel and aluminum exports to the US as a way of avoiding the imposition of the ad valorem tariffs that President Trump had decided on, Trade and Industry Minister Rob Davies said on Monday. A former employee at the Unisa Centre for Early Childhood Education embroiled in a rape scandal claims she was blackmailed into having sex with a board member to keep her job as acting principal. Embattled former president Jacob Zuma is not about to go down for corruption charges without putting up a big fight. Professor Tshilidzi Marwala has always been a high achiever Yesterday, Marwala added a new feather to his numerous achievements when he was inaugurated as the vice-chancellor of UJ.