Bafana Bafana head coach Stuart Baxter has announced a 25-man squad to participate in a 4-Nation Tournament scheduled for Zambia from 22 – 25 March 2018. The other three teams featuring in the double-header event are hosts Zambia, Angola and Zimbabwe. Baxter has made 14 changes to the squad that last played against Senegal in November last year in the 2018 FIFA World Cup qualifier – bringing in goalkeepers Brendon Peterson and Darren Keet, defenders Reeve Frosler, Ramahlwe Mphahlele, Daniel Cardoso, Buhle Mkhwanazi and Innocent Maela; midfielders Siphesihle Ndlovu, Tebogo Mokoena, Aubrey Modiba and Thembinkosi Lorch, as well as strikers Lebo Mothiba and Ryan Moon. Bafana Bafana has faced all three countries in various competitions and international friendly matches before. Zambia is the highest ranked country among all four nations – sitting at 15th on the continent and 76th in the world. Hot on their heels is South Africa, who are 16th and 77th respectively. Zimbabwe and Angola are ranked 25th (105) and 41st (141). The first match will see the home side playing against Zimbabwe on Thursday, 22 March at the Levy Mwanawasa Stadium in Ndola.
Kick-off is at 13h00. South Africa will then take to the field to face Angola at 15h00 at the same venue. The losers in the two matches will fight for bronze on Sunday, 25 March, also at Levy Mwanawasa Stadium at 13h00. The final will be contested by the winners of the match day 1 – and these will face off immediately after the 3rd place play-off. Kick-off is at 3pm. Bafana Bafana assemble for camp on Sunday, March 18 and will depart for Zambia two days later (Tuesday, 20 March). Baxter’s men are expected back in the country on Tuesday, 27 March. The squad to play in 4-Nation tournament in Zambia:Goalkeepers: Khune (Chiefs), Keet (Wits), Peterson (Ajax Cape Town) Defenders: Frosler (Wits), Mphahlele, Cardoso (Chiefs), Hlatshwayo, Mkhwanazi, Hlanti (Wits), Madisha (Sundowns), Maela (Pirates) Midfielders: Furman, Mokoena, Modiba (Supersport), Zwane, Vilakazi (Downs), Ndlovu (Maritzburg), Mokotjo (Brentford), Zungu (Amiens), Lorch ( Pirates), Dolly (Montpellier), Mahlambi (Al Ahly) Strikers: Tau (Sundowns), Mothiba (Lille), Moon (Chiefs) – Sport24