Rituals: The Nando’s Creative Exchange offers emerging artists the chance to develop their art. The outcome of the exchange is an exhibition titled Rituals.
The young artists focused on the significance of what they perceived in everyday rituals. The artists are Christo Basson, Ludumo Maqabuka, Nkoali Nawa and Nkosinathi Quwe. Details:The exhibition is on at the Association for Visual Arts Gallery, 35 Church Street, Cape Town until September 26. For more information visit ava.co.za. In Context / this past was waiting for me: Curated by Liza Essers, the artists use different mediums to unfurl suppressed stories. The exhibition includes the works of Ghada Amer, Yto Barrada, Lisa Brice, Nolan Oswald Dennis, Grada Kilomba, Wangechi Mutu and Misheck Masamvu focusing on stories and identities thathave been obscured by history. Details: The exhibition is on at the Goodman Gallery, Fairweather House, 176 Sir Lowry Road, Cape Town,until September 29. For more information visit goodman-gallery.com. 9 More Weeks: This is an exhibition of works by Dada Khanyisa, Zander Blom, Bronwyn Katz, Kemang Wa Lehulere, Mame-Diarra Niang, Guy Tillim, Claudette Schreuders, Simphiwe Ndzube and Portia Zvavahera who were interviewed by Sinazo Chiya for thebook 9 More Weeks. Details: The exhibition is on at Stevenson, 62 Juta Street, Braamfontein, Johannesburg until October 19. For more information about the gallery’s opening times visit stevenson.info. DStv Delicious Festival: The sixth edition of this festival is a weekend of food and music on a grand scale for the whole family. Neo-soul artist Erykah Badu will be headlining. Details: The festival takes place at the Kyalami Grand Prix Circuit, corner of R55 and Allandale Road, Midrand on September 22 and 23. Tickets cost R45 to R1450 (R4 150 to R4 255 for the luxury packages) and are available from ticketpros.co.za. For more information visit deliciousfestival.com. Monsieur Ibrahim en die Blomme van die Koran: Set in the Jewish Quarters of Paris in 1960, this stage production is about a troubled Jewish boy named Momo who develops a friendship with shop owner Monsieur Ibrahim — after his first sexual encounter with a sex worker. Details: The production is onat the Market Theatre until September 30. Tickets cost R90 and are on sale at webtickets.co.za. For more information visit markettheatre.co.za.