The South African Federation of Trade Unions (Saftu) led thousands of workers and activists in a nationwide one-day strike on Wednesday but their action threatens future worker unity, the federation’s rivals have charged. The strikers demanded that the national minimum wage of R20 an hour be scrapped, amendments to the Labour Relations Act be reconsidered and that the federation be allowed to join the National Economic Development and Labour Council. But the marches took place without the support of Cosatu, the country’s biggest trade union federation, the National Council of Trade Unions (Nactu), which has about 400 000 members, and the Federation of Unions of South Africa (Fedusa), which represents more than 500 000 workers. Cosatu’s general secretary, Bheki Ntshalintshali, said: “They didn’t send their leadership to invite us; they sent one union. We said, ‘Write to us as Cosatu, then let’s talk and see.’ They never did.” But Saftu’s general secretary, Zwelinzima Vavi, this week said Saftu had officially invited all trade union federations but the three had declined to participate. Fedusa general secretary Dennis George called the strike “a total waste of time”. “I think the Saftu leaders have misled the people. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.