A DA congress that was billed as a battle for the soul of the party ended on Sunday with decision that showed it was sticking to its liberal roots. Nearly 60 000 Facebook users in SA may be victims of the social network’s data breach. Imperial CEO Mark Lamberti is expected to resign from the board of Business Leadership SA this week, following the recent ruling in the High Court in Pretoria that found he had discriminated against a former employee. The heritage JL Dube presidential house in Durban has been condemned as unfit for habitation, despite R40-million being pumped into renovations the year Jacob Zuma became head of state. DA leader Mmusi Maimane has strengthened his hand on power after he and his supporters won the debate over diversity in the leadership ranks of the organisation. A shoddy mural bearing little resemblance to late ANC veteran Winnie Madikizela-Mandela has been widely dismissed as an insult to the memory of the struggle icon. The woman and her lover, the father of their two children, were often threatned by a jealous ex-nyatsi. And over the weekend the man’s former lover allegedly took her threats to an unthinkable level. Winnie Madikizela-Mandela’s family, relatives, friends and politicians attended her memorial service in Soweto yesterday. The opposition has vowed to fight tooth and nail to ensure the property clause – protecting owners from not getting compensated for land expropriation – stays unchanged in the constitution. The ruling party is making sure the destitute Mananki Joyce Seipei can be at the struggle veteran’s funeral. A building which houses a mortuary also accommodates a food storage facility for a local Pick n Pay store in Rayton, east of Pretoria. Athol Trollip retained his position as federal chairperson of the DA yesterday, two days before he is set to face a motion of no confidence at the Nelson Mandela Bay municipality Kaizer Chiefs coach Steve Komphela will retain his job until the end of the season despite calls for him to go, Sowetan has learnt.