The City of Joburg has tracked up nearly R3.1-billion in irregular expenditure by failing to comply with its rules and its audit committee has warned that this was preventing it from running a clean administration. Former Eskom chief executive officer Brian Molefe still has a lifeline despite the Pretoria High Court yesterday turning down his leave to appeal against a ruling that he pay back the millions in pension benefits he had unlawfully pocketed. A high-powered ANC delegation was expected to descend on troubled North West today, following a “revolt” by party members demanding the recall of Premier Supra Mahumapelo. Cape Town mayor Patricia de Lille had to “inform her superiors in the DA” before attending Winnie Madikizela-Mandela’s funeral on Saturday, after her appearance at an EFF memorial for the matriarch in Brandfort landed her in hot water last week. Transport Minister Blade Nzimande has released a horrifying preliminary report, showing a significant rise of 14% in deaths on South Africa’s roads over the Easter period. Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane tried to downplay the controversy over her findings and directives on Absa and the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) yesterday when members of the parliament grilled her about what they termed “matters in the public domain”. The auditor-general’s decision to terminate auditing contracts with KPMG will see the embattled audit firm excluded from doing any work for the country’s most valuable client. The IMF has given SA a vote of confidence, revising its growth projections, but also be warned that progress would be slow unless structural reforms were implemented. Public sector employees continue to do significant amounts of business with the state despite being prohibited because of the conflict of interest involved. A mother was stripped naked and had a finger stuck in her private parts during a search on a visit to a prison. Former social development minister Bathabile Dlamini says she acted “diligently” and could not be blamed for the social grant payment crisis. -There is a strong push under way within Cosatu to ensure that Zingiswa Losi, the federation’s second deputy president, is elected the first woman to lead the federation.