The Cape Town Democratic Alliance (DA) caucus has supported the motion of no confidence against mayor Patricia De Lille after a three-hour-long caucus, says deputy caucus leader JP Smith. An internal motion of no confidence against Cape Town Mayor Patricia De Lille was passed during a special DA Cape Town caucus meeting, paving the way for her to be recalled by her party. DA councillors in the City of Cape Town filed into the council chambers for their closed meeting on Wednesday, to finally debate and vote on the future of their embattled mayor following a weeks-long process. The motion was put on the table following the DA’s approval of a so-called “recall clause” at its federal congress earlier in April. De Lille told journalists just before the meeting, that she would be challenging the constitutionality of the clause in court. She also wants to determine if it can be applied “retrospectively” to her, given that she had a pending disciplinary process in the party. Now that the motion has succeeded, De Lille will not be automatically removed as mayor. The process will be referred back to the DA’s federal executive, which will then ask De Lille to make representations to defend herself, as per the party’s new recall clause. If the federal executive ratifies the caucus’ decision, she will be given 48 hours to resign. Failing that, her membership of the party will be terminated. The DA’s special caucus began at 5.15pm on Wednesday, following the adjournment of the broader Cape Town council. Security was tight outside the council chamber and at least two councillors stepped outside to demand that journalists no longer take pictures while DA councillors debated. Councillors could be seen through the glass windows, while media, security, City staff, and a handful of ANC Cape Town caucus members waited. After just over two hours of debate, councillors starting lining up to collect and cast their secret ballots, as seen through the glass windows of the council chamber. The votes were then taken away after almost three hours since the special caucus meeting began. The Democratic Alliance’s federal executive will now consider the caucus’ request.
— News24