Labour tenants, who work for a landowner in exchange for the right to use a portion of the land for their sustenance, could be the first beneficiaries of the government’s policy to expropriate land without compensation. Following his State of the Nation address earlier this year, President Cyril Ramaphosa explained that labour tenants would be one of the three groups that land expropriation without compensation would target as its beneficiaries. Ramaphosa noted that the much-debated expropriation process would help the department of rural development and land reform to expedite labour tenants’ claims. He said this formed part of his plan to increase agricultural productivity and employment opportunities in rural areas by bringing more producers into the sector. “Expropriation without compensation is envisaged as one of the measures to be used to accelerate redistribution of land to black South Africans,” he said. “We need to determine collectively how we can implement this measure in a way that promotes agricultural production, improves food security, advances rural development, reduces poverty and strengthens our economy.” Ramaphosa, who is on an investment roadshow in London this week, told Bloomberg TV that land reform would expand the economy and “unlock levers of growth around land”. Reform measures to benefit labour tenants have had a limited effect to date. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.