SA’s state-owned enterprises (SOEs) have been classified “red”, “amber” or “green” in a matrix put together by the Treasury, while Finance Minister Nhlanhla Nene says he plans to go public soon on those coded “red”, with a view to turning them around. Political and civil society leaders and ordinary South Africans visited the Mandela home in Soweto on Wednesday to offer their condolences on the death of Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. There is a sense of frustration among junior and small miners that they are being largely sidelined in the talks between new Mineral Resources Minister Gwede Mantashe and industry players, according to Bernard Swanepoel, chairman of the Small Business Initiative. Steinhoff shareholders were dealt another blow on Tuesday, when the company announced that its European property portfolio might be worth only half of the €2.2-billion at which it was previously valued. ANC veteran Winnie Madikizela-Mandela had lunch with her family on Sunday afternoon, hours before she was rushed to hospital after complaining that she was struggling to breathe. “We would not have known an animal called Zuma,” said Julius Malema, speaking at Ma Winnie’s home yesterday. “Winnie Mandela was the president we never had.” Three days before her death, Mama Winnie Madikizela-Mandela attended church on Good Friday. Madikizela-Mandela in January filed papers at the Constiutional Court to continue her battle to inherit Nelson Mandela’s Qunu homestead – a fight her lawyer says highlights the plight of widows in rural areas. Cash-strapped power utility finally acts on controversial issue of its headcount. Australia arrived here with much-hyped bowling attack that had just destroyed England in the Ashes, with South Africa’s bowlers then upstaging them to spearhead the 3-1 series win sealed at the Wanderers yesterday, but Kagiso Rabada said the Proteas had won the series with the better batting line-up Thembu royal house wants her to be buried side-by-side with Madiba, family announces burial will be in Jo’burg. The abaThembu royal family has expressed a desire to see struggle icon Winnie Madikizela-Mandela buried in Qunu in the Eastern Cape, the ancestral home of former president Nelson Mandela.