Supporters of former president Jacob Zuma will “nationalise” their campaign in his defence and hold simultaneous marches outside the high court divisions across South Africa during his court appearances on corruption and fraud charges. ANC leaders in KwaZulu-Natal and the eThekwini region have closed ranks around Zuma, showing support for him in their “individual capacity” by participating in a night vigil and march ahead of his appearance on Friday morning. The party’s national executive committee has instructed members who do attend court in support of Zuma to refrain from wearing party colours or regalia, “creating the false impression that the ANC as an organisation identifies with, or approves of, the misdemeanours of which any member or leader may be accused” . On Wednesday, Zuma’s supporters used his visit to the home of deceased ANC stalwart Winnie Madikizela-Mandela to show solidarity with him ahead of his court appearance. The group sang songs praising Zuma and arrived wearing T-shirts with his portrait on them. The support campaign is likely to place further pressure on the party’s fragile unity, particularly in KwaZulu-Natal, Zuma’s home province, whose leaders backed the failed bid to elect Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma as ANC president. Bishop Vusi Dube, an ANC provincial legislature member in KwaZulu-Natal who has emerged as one of the key organisers of the Defend Zuma campaign, said the alliance of religious leaders, Black First Land First and KwaZulu-Natal-based business lobby groups believes a huge show of strength will give rise to a national movement in support of Zuma. Dube, the founder of eThekwini Community Church International, is co-convener of the National Interfaith Council of South Africa and the Commission for Religious Affairs, which is co-ordinating the vigil and march in support of Zuma. Dube is a veteran of the 2006 campaign to keep Zuma out of jail. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.