Expensive whisky, pens, cash, traditional outfits, tickets and hotel stays for jazz festivals are among undeclared gifts valued at R6.3-million senior state managers received as possible kickbacks. Bite your tongue and refrain from road rage. This was once again the message from the high court in Pretoria, which turned down the appeal of a man who swore at a fellow motorist and grabbed him by the collar, simply because he had accidentally driven against traffic in a one-way road in a parking lot. A cartoonist is hellbent on taking the fight to Eskom over the power utility’s alleged copyright infringement worth more than R25-million. KPMG will face renewed pressure from its banking clients after it emerged that the two partners who quit the firm at the weekend – facing disciplinary charges relating to its audit of failed VBS Mutual Bank – both also worked on the audits of large commercial banks. The Guptas have returned their Bombardier jet to SA after the Canadian bank that financed the aircraft asked the court to hold them in contempt for failing to deliver the aircraft on time. The South African audit profession’s watchdog is considering forcing firms to split their audit and advisory arms in an effort to enhance their independence and improve audit quality. Cops were ready at the weekend when people at a funeral decided to celebrate with gunfire. The EFF has rubbished claims that they’re in talks with the ANC about a possible coalition.
Party spokesman Mbuyiseni Ndlozi yesterday said the claims made in the Sunday Times were completely untrue. Woman discovers on her due date that the foetus died when she was four months pregnant. Cape Town International Airport is set to be renamed after late former president Nelson Mandela. North West health MEC Magome Masike has blamed the increasing number of deaths of patients and defaults on treatment on the ongoing strike by health workers in the province. For years, she kept it bottled up inside her – ongoing sexual abuse by men she should have been able to trust and in places she should have been safe. Then, she couldn’t take it any more and went to the police last week. Cape Town mayor Patricia de Lille has defended Julius Malema’s words at the funeral of Winnie Madikizela-Mandela at the weekend. The National Prosecuting Authority has bid farewell to one of its fiercest fighters for justice for abused women and children.