She will be remembered as a fearless fighter for freedom who gave everything to the struggle. She will be remembered as a loving mother, gogo and great-grandmother with a warm heart.
Mam Uwinnie will never be forgotten. The department of arts and culture yesterday confirmed that about R1-million is missing from the project to rebuild Mama Winnie’s house in Brandfort, Free State. Former diplomat and minister Zola Skweyiya died yesterday morning at Pretoria Hospital after a short illness, just a few days before he was due to turn 76. A 19-year-old mother blames a nurse for her baby’s death and for telling her to travel with the infant’s corpse back home. Tshireletso Mothibedi’s one-month-old daughter died at a North West hospital’s clinic over a week ago. EFF leader Julius Malema is billed to speak at Winnie Madikizela-Mandela’s funeral on Saturday, in line with a special request from her family. An Algerian military plane crashed and caught fire yesterday, killing 257 people ― mostly army personnel and members of their families ― officials said. Cape Town mayor Patricia de Lille’s attendance at yesterday’s EFF memorial service for Winnie Madikizela-Mandela could be seen as her thumbing her nose at the DA and an indication that she is ready to swap the DA’s blue for the EFF’s red. If convicted racist Vicki Momberg had shown true remorse, she may possibly have escaped her two year jail sentence on four counts of crimen injuria. A South African businessman who circulated a video of Ajay Gupta in Dubai is now languishing in a United Arab Emirates jail. A brazen shootout resulted in two of the 16 suspected Johannesburg Correctional Centre escapees being gunned down by Kwazulu-Natal police on Tuesday night. Inspector-general of intelligence Setlhomamaru Dintwe is set to ask the high court in Pretoria next week for an urgent interdict to prevent the head of the State Security Agency, Arthur Fraser, from revoking his security clearance and interfering in his duties. The benefits of registering Steinhoff in Holland became apparent once more as it emerged on Wednesday that Christo Wiese’s egregious self-dealing does not represent a contravention of Dutch company law. Sagarmatha’s failure to submit its annual financial statements to the Companies and Intellectual Property Commission (CIPC) was behind the JSE’s decision not to allow it to go ahead with a proposed listing on Friday. Former Airports Company SA (Acsa) chairman Roshan Morar is ineligible to serve as a director of the state-owned airports operator and can therefore no longer be its chairman, says a spokesman for Transport Minister Blade Nzimande.