Kaizer Chiefs will likely face heavy scrutiny in the coming days after the Premier Soccer League condemned the ugly scenes in Durban on Saturday night. Fans stormed the Moses Mabhida pitch after Amakhosi’s 2-0 loss to Free State Stars in the Nedbank Cup semifinal. Fires were ignited in the stands, missiles thrown, television equipment was trashed to the value of millions of rands and a guard was reportedly left fighting for her life after a vicious assault. “The Premier Soccer League strongly condemns acts of hooliganism and violence that took place at the Moses Mabhida Stadium on Saturday night during the fixture between Kaizer Chiefs and Free State Stars,” the league said in a statement on Sunday morning. “Hooliganism and thuggery of this nature has no place in football and acts of violence perpetrated by individuals are witnessed last night cannot be tolerated. “The League will work closely with law enforcement to ensure that those responsible for this hooliganism are subjected to judicial processes.” The incident comes just three days after the club was fined R250 000 (R200 000 of which was suspended) for failing to control their supporters after their humbling at the hands of Chippa United at the FNB Stadium on April 7. Coach Steve Komphela, believed to be on his way out at the end of the season, resigned with immediate effect on Saturday evening. An appalled Minister of Sport and Recreation Tokozile Xasa, meanwhile, has demanded that the PSL provide answers over how this incident was allowed to occur. “We can’t wait for another person to die before we act. PSL and Stadium management must provide answers on what happened in Moses Mabhida Stadium,” she said in a statement on Sunday morning. “How did supporters manage to storm the ground and endanger people’s lives? Football is a beautiful game and I can’t idle while few supporters are making a skunk of our game. Answers must be provided on what happened yesterday. “This continues to make mockery of SASREA ACT as it clearly demonstrate that certain security elements are either not met or never implemented which warrants an investigation. While still looking into reinstating the committee of enquiry into the FNB stampede then this happens. This validates my view that an investigation must happen, so that we fully understand areas of weakness in sport security.”