The Ingonyama Trust Board (ITB), facing closure in terms of recommendations by Parliament’s high-level panel report, has been further rocked by the departure of its chief executive officer, Fikisiwe Madlopha, who quit the nearly R2-million a year job last month. The ITB, which controls nearly three million hectares of land on behalf of King Goodwill Zwelithini, is battling for its survival. Madlopha’s exit follows a flood of senior staff resignations, many understood to be related to uncertainty about the future of the ITB, which was set up to secure the participation of Zwelithini and Inkatha, as the Inkatha Freedom Party was then known, in the 1994 elections. The ITB has begun its search for a replacement for Madlopha, a career civil servant who has been central to consolidating its programme of converting residential and commercial permission-to-occupy certificates into leases. Staff members this week confirmed that Madlopha had quit the post. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.