Private jet, supercars, farms, helicopter and property attached in joint Hawks, Sars and NPA swoop on family. The Gauteng department of education had received 150 000 online applications for grades 1 and 8 by yesterday afternoon. The Asset Forfeiture Unit (AFU) has moved to seize cars, aircraft and properties worth at least R250m belonging to the Guptas and their associates, allegedly bought with looted state funds. In another blow to two of the country’s top four audit firms, the curator of Venda Building Society Mutual Bank, Anoosh Rooplal, has announced the withdrawal of the bank’s 2017 audited financial statements. The South African Revenue Service (SARS) is cracking down on non-compliant taxpayers, “including prominent South Africans”, a move seen as a renewed bid by the receiver of revenue to claw back its credibility amid low tax morality. Former DA-leader Tony Leon says he did the right thing in asking for the murder investigation to be reopened into Madikizela-Mandela and claims to the contrary are ‘an attempt to sanitise history’. Former cabinet minister Sydney Mufamadi was credible in his explanation on why the ANC and its former internal wing, the United Democratic Front, took a stand against the former Mandela Football Club and why they wanted Winnie Madikizela-Mandela to ditch it, says Nomboniso Gasa, independent commentator and gender activist. President Cyril Ramaphosa yesterday appointed some of the country’s financial heavyweights to head up an ambitious investment drive aimed at attracting at least $100-billion in new foreign direct investments over the next five years. Two families, living through the heartbreak of losing their daughters in separate heinous murders, yesterday faced the pain of coming face to face with the suspected killers in court. European Union foreign ministers yesterday threatened new sanctions on Syria over what the West says were chemical attacks on its own people, but held off from joining expected new US punitive measures against Russia. North West Premier Supra Mahumapelo’s political career comes under scrutiny today as he faces a motion of no confidence brought by the EFF. Mufamadi, the first minister of safety and security after apartheid, was speaking at a media conference held at St George’s Anglican Church in Parktown, Joburg. Da shadow minister of police Zakhele Mbhele said illegal land invasions in Nelson Mandela Bay, Eastern Cape will not be tolerated. The Guptas are nowhere to be found but their corrupt deals are still being investigated.