There is no speaking of Winnie Madikizela-Mandela without hearing about the 14-year-old boy Moeketsi “Stompie” Seipei, an activist from the Free State and still a hero in the province, who was murdered in 1989. After nearly 30 years of questions and speculation, there is still no definitive answer to the extent of Madikizela-Mandela’s involvement in the murder of Stompie, whose body was found in a wasteland near her home in Soweto. Yet the stain that she committed the murder, or sanctioned it, has lasted longer and louder than the facts presented before two separate and full trials and the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) headed by Archbishop Desmond Tutu in the 1990s. Madikizela-Mandela was found guilty in 1991 for Stompie’s kidnapping and being an accessory to his assault. Three years earlier, self-confessed apartheid informer and the “coach” of the Mandela United Football Club, Jerry Richardson, was sentenced to life behind bars for the boy’s murder. Neither the courts nor the TRC found that Madikizela-Mandela had murdered Stompie. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.