The Defend Zuma campaign will kick into top gear at the former president’s court appearance Winnie Madikizela-Mandela’s seven years in Brandfort conscientised a community “In every job I’ve done I’ve been connected to uMam’ Winnie.” Her family recalls her determination, fund and kindness when she visited home The IEC may not be ready to implement new political party funding laws until after next year’s general elections because of inadequate fundings and staff capacity Federal congress will grasp race nettles: a diversity clause and black delegates’ under-representation Vindicated former Imperial executive hopes her case will give female workers the courage to speak out The ITB, which controls nearly three million hectares of land on behalf of King Goodwill Zwelithini, is battling for its survival The party that is not giving her a special official funeral once shunned her as a ‘wayward charlatan’ No testimony provided in the court and TRC hearings nailed her to the murders she was accused of The liberation struggle’s most fearless fighter is remembered by comrades and strangers alike Military Veteran’s Association steps in after the M&G highlights the plight of freedom fighters Ayanda Christine Bako suffered from complex post-traumatic stress syndrome from her days as a freedom fighter. It was made worse by conditions once she got back home An anti-poaching buffer zone in Mozambique has led to a company being accused of grabbing land Nurses have huge responsibility, but little authority. 
Here’s what needs to change Misconceptions about HIV infection and drug users could shut down Durban’s only programme trying to curb the spread of the virus. Many of Mali’s soldiers aren’t  prepared to risk their lives fighting in the north of the country. One deserter explains why As Zimbabwe regains a degree of stability, expect China to ramp up investment there Sierra Leone’s opposition challenger Julius Maada Bio secured his first term in office as a civilian Wednesday when he was declared the winner of a controversial presidential run-off – but his opponent vowed to contest the result. The new prime minister is a decisive break from the past, but will he keep pushing for reform? Analysts doubt the listing of media assets will succeed. But will the PIC provide the funds? In an attempt to keep customers, retialers will absorb some of the hike — for a while About a quarter of its generation capacity is out of commission but power utility Eskom says it does not expect load-shedding this winter Loopholes and delay tactics allow bogus owners to get rent for buildings in legal limbo As demand for honey booms, local producers can’t compete with cheaper imports and the use of additives results in consumers being cheated Milisuthando Bongela attempts to put into words who it is that has died Although Zukiswa Wanner and her loved ones missed the church service, it was a memorable Easter weekend Grada Kilomba’s work traces the history of the black diaspora, exploring difference but also finding sameness Pushing past fears of creating a critical dialogue about the ANC’s revered leader, a new conversation opens Hitting home: During its recent State Theatre run, Sello Maseko’s musical ‘Angola’ struck a chord with many South Africans whose loved ones harbour secrets and trauma about the armed struggle. Bonded by history as much as the present, the two genres of expression work together effortlessly Niq Mhlongo on writing about the present with a nod to the past, and the slices of life that sit waiting on every pavement of his childhood home Egyptian Lover says it’s the sound of the 808 drum machine that keeps people partying to his music It is no mistake that Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was the subject of the poetry of one of the finest American poets, Gwendolyn Brooks, who also happened to be a black woman. It would be a dishonour to the life of a remarkable human being to demand hagiography. But it is only right to demand honesty. The DA has certainly grown but it also has to confront the challenges that come with counting many more among your numbers. Readers write in about getting the context of the bible right, South Africa’s response to the Australian cricket scandal, and being more positive in your outlook. Daddy did too, finding time to visit her family while his own reckoning looms The liberal public sphere is still unwilling to accord equal weight to all human lives Yet these skilled professionals are discriminated against by their colleagues Yes, it finally happened: the whole world ditched Facebook and it’s just me and Mark Zuckerberg left. Why did I stay, you ask? Well, if Zuckerberg accepts your friend request, you don’t leave. Streamlined delivery chains are needed, as is the ability to construct safe infrastructure It has an ethical concern to help people coexist and to understand each other and society The Reds triumphed in their first Champions League quarter-final in nine years Aboriginal activists use Commonwealth Games to draw attention to plight of Oz’s first people Maritzburg’s coach is hoping to reboot the team’s winning streak when they take on Cape Town City