In a ruling certain to have consequences in talks about a new Mining Charter, the high court ruled on Wednesday that empowerment deals did not need to be topped up once a company had reached the 26% black ownership level and companies could not be penalised for falling below this level. MultiChoice’s grip on the pay-TV market could soon be loosened after a proposal by the Independent Communications Authority of SA (Icasa) to introduce shared sports rights and shorten exclusive contract periods. The continuing rout in global technology stocks driven by mounting concern about a trade war, saw stocks prices on the JSE retreat sharply, with internet and entertainment group Naspers leading the drop in intraday trade. Steinhoff share price slumped to a record low of R3.01 on Wednesday after news of a possible € 1-billion write down on its European property portfolio. Light relief has been granted to some 900 000 Jo’burg property owners who are up in arms over massive increases in rates and tariffs set to kick in on July 1. Struggle veteran Winnie Madikizela-Mandela has been lauded by her Methodist Church in Meadowlands, Soweto, this week. Stunned and confused friends and family members are asking why the brutal killings took place. The amendment bill, which will allow for infringement notices to be served via electronic media for those refusing to pay e-tolls, is nothing but a moneymaking racket, meant to fleece experts, says expert. Morne Morkel may not have picked up a wicket on his final day of Test cricket, but the big man was still beaming as he finished his Proteas career up there with the very best fast bowlers South Africa has produced. The convicted racist raises eyebrows with cornrow hairstyle. 400 security guards demand answers after their company failed to contributions to administrators. The ANC’s fragile unity will be severely tested as supporters of former president Jacob Zuma begin mobilisation ahead of his court appearance in the Durban High Court tomorrow. Africa News Network has been vindicated by the Broadcasting Complaints Commission of South Africa, which has cleared the channel of any wrongdoing regarding an interview with its chairperson following media reports on the supposed arrest of Indians at the company during a rain in connection with foreigners’ work and residency permits.