The Australian mining company seeking the right to mine in Xolobeni in the Eastern Cape has been lashed for its treatment of a Western Cape community and accused of breaching its legal obligations. In the Matzikama municipality along the West Coast, resentment lingers against Mineral Commodities Limited (MRC). In 2012, the company’s Tormin mine acquired the rights to mine 15km of beach along the Matzikama coast for heavy mineral sands — zircon, garnet and titanium minerals rutile and ilmenite. Today, Tormin stands accused of breaching that 15km boundary to the point where a 17m cliff below it has collapsed. It is operated by MRC’s South African subsidiary, Mineral Sands Resources (MSR). A new report by global poverty alleviation nonprofit Oxfam, spurred by Xolobeni residents’ resistance to MRC’s bid to mine titanium along the Wild Coast, shows how the mine allegedly breached the terms of its mining rights agreement. Oxfam found that MSR had not delivered on its upliftment programme, despite revenues of R750‑million and a profit of R150‑million after tax in 2017. “It appears MSR’s modus operandi is to do what it wants to do, regardless of the regulatory environment within which it exists or the priorities of other role-players,” Oxfam said in its report. For a company to acquire mining rights from the mineral resources department, it must submit social and labour plans with detailed upliftment projects aimed at correcting historical injustices and supporting mineworkers, according to the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act. In 2015, the department reported that 36% of mining companies had not reached their social and labour plan targets. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.