The Ingonyama Trust Board (ITB) has been ordered by the auditor general to pay to the treasury millions of rands in mining royalties it has collected since 1994. The royalties from companies mining on land under the ITB, which controls about three million hectares of tribal land in KwaZulu-Natal on behalf of King Goodwill Zwelithini, will now have to be paid into the National Revenue Fund (NRF). The decision is a blow to the ITB, which is fighting for survival in the wake of Parliament’s high-level panel report that recommended the trust be phased out and that the land it controls be transferred to the state and then to individual residents to improve security of land tenure. Last month Parliament’s portfolio committee on rural development and land reform instructed the ITB to stop converting residential permission-to-occupy certificates into leases. There are coal and iron ore deposits in the north of the province, and zinc and titanium slag on the North Coast. The ITB receives royalties from mining houses, which also lease the land from which they extract minerals. ITB chairperson Jerome Ngwenya has, for years, resisted pressure from the committee to declare the money received in royalties to the NRF. The ITB, which has been under pressure from MPs to detail how it has used the  funds it collects from royalties and leases  to benefit residents, instead challenged attempts by Parliament and the auditor general to have it pay royalties to the central fiscus. In October 2014, the committee’s budget review noted that the ITB “incorrectly recognises the royalties received from mining operators as revenue”. The committee said the auditor general had found the ITB’s practice contradicts the requirements of state accounting regulations, among them the Generally Recognised Accounting Practice (GRAP) 9, regulating revenue from exchange transactions, and GRAP 17, which governs revenue from property and equipment transactions. The new directive from the auditor general to the ITB was made public last week at a meeting of the land reform committee. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.