This year the Pulitzer juries responded to the zeitgeist of the Donald Trump era, awarding prizes to works that appraise perhaps the most notable pitfall of the man’s presidency — a society that finds itself increasingly divided along the faultlines of race and gender. Setting a precedent, this year rapper Kendrick Lamar became the first nonclassical, non-jazz artist to win the prestigious prize for music. The committee also awarded the prize for public service to The New York Times and The New Yorker, and the prize for investigative reporting to The Washington Post, for blowing the lid off institutionalised sexism. All these bodies of work have found themselves at the centre of movements taking on the culture of impunity about the violence faced by black Americans and women. Lamar won the award for his 2017 album Damn, which the award panel described as “a virtuosic song collection unified by its vernacular authenticity and rhythmic dynamism that offers affecting vignettes capturing the complexity of modern African-American life”. The Grammy-nominated artist’s album edged out Michael Gilbertson’s Quartet, which follows the conventions of the string quartet, and Ted Hearne’s Sound from the Bench, a work that mixes chamber choir music with more contemporary instrumental elements. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.