An independent investigation has cleared the Resilient Group of alleged misconduct but those who originally raised the alarm claim the truth is yet to come out. In February, three separate analyst reports highlighted serious concerns about the JSE-listed Resilient group of companies, as did another report released in late March. Reports by fund managers 36One, Navigare Securities, Arqaam Capital and Mergence Investment Managers alleged that the premium valuations of Resilient group shares were not a result of normal market activity but rather of share price manipulation by the company and affiliated parties. Magda Wierzycka, the chief executive of Sygnia Asset Management, after an analysis of Resilient’s financials, described it as a Ponzi scheme. In a Stock Exchange News Service (Sens) announcement this week, Resilient said the independent investigation, commissioned in mid-February by the board and led by former auditor general Shauket Fakie, had found no evidence of market manipulation, insider trader or misconduct, among other things. Investigations into the trading of Resilient shares by the JSE and the Financial Sector Conduct Authority, the new incarnation of the Financial Services Board (FSB), are still underway. The Resilient share price halved from R100 in early February to R50 in early April but it gained 27% over the past week. But Cy Jacobs, the chief executive and co-founder of 36One Asset Management, which produced the most extensive and damning of the reports, said the fund’s view of the group had not been changed by the outcome of the Fakie investigation. “[Its] report conclusions are surprising and inconsistent with our report and the reports of other asset managers,” he said. “We are confident that the truth will come out.” Mergence Investment Managers also said it did not believe the investigation addressed it’s concerns and those raised by other market participants.“The scope of the investigation was narrow and the powers of the investigator limited,” Mergence said. 36One’s and Arqaam’s reports said share price inflation was made possible by a convoluted group structure, in which four companies each own stakes in one another and trade intergroup shares frequently. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.