The Mlangeni family was about to give up on their mission to find their grandfather’s grave on the Free State farm when someone tripped over a gravestone concealed in the tall grass. On closer scrutiny, they sighed with relief — this was the grave the family had travelled all the way from Johannesburg to find. The face of freedom fighter Andrew Mlangeni, who last Friday was conferred with an honorary doctorate in law by Rhodes University, lights up when he recalls the story, which took place in June last year. A founding member of the ANC’s armed wing Umkhonto weSizwe, he was convicted of high treason in the Rivonia Trial and spent 26 years, from 1963 to 1989, in prison. Ever since he returned home from prison, his children and grandchildren have been eager to see his father’s final resting place. The family hired a minibus and about 15 of them drove to the former QwaQwa Bantustan. He had last been there in 1953, when one of his older brothers had taken the family there to conduct ancestral rites. His father, Aaron Matiya Mlangeni, died in 1932 and was buried on the farm, which was owned by the Naudes. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.