UPDATE: Transport Minister Blade Nzimande has appointed a new interim board at rail agency Prasa headed by the CEO of Business Unity South Africa Khanyisile Kweyama. In a statement released late on Thursday evening Nzimande stressed that the move was in line with the new period of change, renewal and revitalization brought on by President Cyril Ramaphosa. Former Rand WAter CEO, Dr Simo Lushaba has also been appointed as the Acting Group CEO (AGCEO) of PRASA. The new interim board which will be serving for an initial period not exceeding 12 months also include, Mr Sango Ntsaluba, Mr Louis Wessie, Ms Jenny Schreiner, Mr Nazir Alli, Ms Doris Tshepe and Ms Mashila Matlala. “I am committed to change the state of paralysis which currently obtains at PRASA and that this must be a thing of the past. “This Board is carefully selected on the basis of skills and expertise required to run a company of this magnitude. Their skills set include amongst others the technical, corporate governance, legal, finance, risk management and human resources,” said Nzimande. These appointments follow the resignation of former interim chairperson Tintswalo Makhubele, who left last month to take up a position as a High Court Judge. The new board will be joined by representatives of from the Department of Transport, National Treasury and SALGA. The mammoth clean-up facing the new brooms at the state-owned enterprises is illustrated by the case of the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (Prasa), where 216 contracts worth R19-billion are being investigated by the treasury. Thirteen forensic and legal firms have examined these contracts and only 13 are above board, according to reports leaked to the media. The job may be huge but it is hardly proceeding at a breakneck pace. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.