In an incident that reveals how our correctional services are under severe strain, two prison warders were stabbed and a prisoner scalded with boiling water during a ritual between two rival gangs at the Goodwood Correctional Facility in Cape Town. Years before SA sprinter Akani Simbine obliterated Jamaican favourite Yohan Blake in the final of the 100m race at the Gold Coast Commonwealth Games. The case of three former Sars executives facing charges in connection with the bugging of the Directorate of Special Operation and the NPA offices in 2007 was postponed to June 18. One of SA’s most respected bankers, GT Ferreira, who co-founded FirstRand with Paul Harris and Laurie Dippenaar, has seen more than R1bn of his wealth wiped out by the collapse of Steinhoff as his own direct investment in the retail group has collapsed to a fraction of its initial value. The boardroom power struggle at the Acsa saw yet another postponement of a director’s meeting on Monday after a sitting to consider the tenure of CEO Bongani Maseko and other senior officials was once again called off at the last moment. Edcon is considering closing its flagship Edgars store in the Johannesburg central business district as part of a turnaround strategy to rescue the ailing retailer. The families living in the abandoned building which partially collapsed yesterday, killing three children, had been asking the City of Joburg for emergency accommodation for eight months according to Seri. All the fine promises we made after Nelson Mandela died were broken and we must not do the same to the memory of Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. Every week, Friday descends on Maureen Mtshali’s home like a black cloud. She has been tormented since thugs tortured and burned her son. A massive manhunt has been launched by police.
The department of correctional services has reported that 16 dangerous awaiting trial prisoners escaped. “Thank you for the wonderful meal mama. I’m going out to play now.” These were the last words 10 year old Phiwe Shoba spoke to his mother moments before he was crushed to death From not having gone through a formal schooling system to today being called Dr Esther Mahlangu.