The Constitutional Court judgment of December  29 on the language policy for the University of the Free State (UFS) is seminal and its implications are several. The judgment’s outcome affirms that the UFS language policy is not in contravention of the Constitution or the language policy for higher education. AfriForum and Solidarity’s application for leave to appeal was refused and the judgment confirms that English will be the primary medium of instruction, although Afrikaans may be used in specific professional degrees at the level of the tutorial, rather than the lecture. The judgment considers the role of Afrikaans in the erstwhile UFS language policy: “It is absolutely impossible to provide language of choice without indirectly discriminating on the basis of race” and associates this with the unintended consequence of racially segregated classrooms, which in turn contributes to race tension and an absence of race integration. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.