Gazing out over a space as elemental as this, with its stark rocky peaks and pink quartz valleys that seem to go on forever, you would be forgiven for thinking this desolate world of outcrops and lunar landscapes in Morocco’s Souss-Massa region, a central part of the Anti-Atlas mountains, is deserted. It is only after winding one’s way through precarious passes, surmounting one rocky zenith after another, that the landscape finally relents and the stone terraces come into view — mountain peaks like Jbel Sirwa reaching 3 304m, traced with stone walls from top to bottom — that you realise you are looking at a landscape that has been inhabited for more than 60 centuries. The area is bordered by the Sahara in the south, the High Atlas mountains in the north, and Tafraoute — also called Morocco’s Berber heartland — with a population of just less than 5 000 people and its neolithic cave paintings, is the biggest town in these parts. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.