THE PLAY LIST Moses Sumney: Aromanticism. Moses Sumney is a singer of perplexing beauty. On this, his debut album of 35 exquisite minutes, he explores love and lovelessness in pitches that dare and succeed in sealing the splenetic appendages of rejection with pure grace.
Quarrel, Lonely World, Doomed, Self-help Tape and Indulge Me are firm favourites. That he is only 27 years old is frightening. (MB) Nubya Garcia: Nubya’s 5ive. The British jazz scene is looking mighty healthy nowadays, as Nubya Garcia’s album demonstrates. Here, she features several torchbearers of her generation, such as Moses Boyd, Theon Cross and Femi Koleoso from the Ezra Collective. It is a lush, varied album of innovative, intricate musicianship that does not beat you over the head with its pedigree. Lots of understated layers. The sound of a new school. (KS) THE READING LIST On Being with Krista Tippett: The Universe is a Question. I didn’t have an opportunity to listen to this podcast episode of the show but read the transcription of Tippet’s conversation with philosopher Kevin Kelly, the man credited with shaping the character and spiritual meaning of technology. The tab stayed open between writing and interviews and, instead of ignoring it like the other many tabs, I kept returning to it. As a twentysomething surviving and thriving with a heavy reliance on all things digital, most of my days end with me feeling as though my spirit being is neglected. But Kelly’s perception of technology as a channel that is working towards increasing the possibilities in the universe is opening up a new way for me to see my digitalness. Listen to the episode at onbeing.org (ZH) Transfiguration and Transcendence: The Music of Alice Coltrane. “In a February 23 1967 DownBeat review of Live at the Village Vanguard Again!, Alice warrants but a single line in a 15-paragraph review: “Mrs Coltrane’s piano support is always firm and appropriate, never overbusy or obtrusive.” This is an excerpt from an Andy Beta article (published on Pitchfork) looking at how Alice Coltrane’s contribution to the jazz canon and, in particular, to her husband’s changing musical and spiritual path, has been overlooked and, in some cases, understated. The article details how, pursuing a trajectory of self-healing at the time of free jazz and a burning America, she struggled just to earn the label “artist”. Check it out at pitchfork.com. (KS) The Lists were compiled by Friday editor Milisuthando Bongela, writer Kwanele Sosibo and intern Zaza Hlalethwa