For something that has taken 10 years to get off the ground, Judge Nkola Motata’s judicial conduct tribunal unfolded very quickly and with little drama once it began. The tribunal will make findings that — depending on what it decides — could see post-1994 South Africa’s first impeachment of a judge. Established in 2013, the tribunal was bogged down by litigation, which had judiciary watchers questioning whether the country’s judges would ever be held accountable when they are accused of seriously transgressing their ethical duties. There are a number of tribunals that should follow closely on the heels of the Motata hearing, the most contentious one being the complaint against Western Cape Judge President John Hlophe made in 2008 by all the then justices of the Constitutional Court. Motata’s tribunal was set up to look into two complaints of gross misconduct arising from his 2007 car crash and the drunken driving trial that followed. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.