Another One’s Bread: Taken from the Afrikaans expression “een man se dood is ’n ander man se brood”, Another One’s Bread is a dark comedy about four women in Khayelitsha who become professional mourners and collect food from funerals to feed hungry pupils. Written by Mike van Graan and directed by Pamela Nomvete, the production plays out the complex dynamics of food security, nutrition and hunger.
Details: On at the Market Theatre, 56 Margaret Mcingana Street, Newtown, Johannesburg until February 4. Tickets are R90 from webtickets.co.za. For more information about performance times, visit markettheatre.co.za Here I am, a concrete man, throwing himself into abstraction by Kemang Wa Lehulere: Taken from a line in his father’s journal, the exhibition sees Wa Lehulere using sculpture, installation and drawing to continue his questioning of historical narratives while exploring new formal possibilities. Wooden structures bound by shoelaces reference the childhood game of catching birds. But the objects do not disguise their predatory nature even in their stillness. Both bird and catcher are evoked by the works that offer multiple statements from a single utterance, suggesting both innocence and incarceration. Details: On at the Stevenson Gallery, 160 Sir Lowry Road, Woodstock, Cape Town, until March 10. Entrance is free. Visit stevenson.info Market @ The Sheds: End the month with “guilt-free indulgences” at The Sheds’ #FirstWeFeast. There will be more than 50 merchant stands, pop-up exhibitions, craft beer, street food and an open stage where local artists will perform. Details: On January 27 from 11am at the 012Central, 381 Helen Joseph Street, Pretoria. For more information and tickets, visit marketatthesheds.co.za Waterfall hike: Looking for an eco adventure? Hike in the Eastern Cape’s mountains along the Sand River to a beautiful waterfall. You will, at times, have to swim through crystal clear rock pools. The four-to-five-hour hike ends with a swim at the waterfall. This hike is for intermediate hikers and children under the age of 12 can’t go on it. There are other hikes to try out. Details: The Sand River Getaway Tented Lodge is 60km from Port Elizabeth. For more information visit sandrivergetaway.co.za or email sandrivergetawayinfo@gmail.com.