In President Cyril Ramaphosa’s State of the Nation address he said that “no nation can be free until its women are free”. South African women will not be free as long as society remains a patriarchal one — another point the new president made in his response to the debate on his State of the Nation address. Ramaphosa correctly referred to how public servants have failed South Africans with “poor service or no service at all”. I believe this poor service by public servants can result in the death of abused women and their children. There is public outcry when it is reported in the media that a woman has been murdered by a partner or family member. But what is rarely heard of is the long journey that women must go through to get protection from their abusers. Death is usually the end result of months and even years of abuse. How many of these abused women approached the police and the various court officials for support before they were killed? The 224 930 warrants of arrest that were issued in the past two years are proof that many people are not silent about abuse. Some women continue to be abused and dehumanised when they report the abuse to the police and the court. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.