Renewed vigour to tackle corruption head on was apparent in the treasury’s 2018 Budget, tabled in Parliament on Wednesday. Deep-rooted and widespread corruption became commonplace in the public sector under the leadership of former president Jacob Zuma, who himself is at the centre of state capture allegations. In his budget speech, the minister of finance, Malusi Gigaba, said the government has demonstrated its resolve to confront allegations of state capture and corruption because of the judicial commission of inquiry announced by Zuma and the investigations being conducted by the Hawks, the Asset Forfeiture Unit and other agencies. At a press briefing earlier on in the day, Gigaba replied to questions about his own credibility, given claims that he facilitated state capture in his previous roles as public enterprises minister and home affairs minister.  “We will all subject ourselves to the state capture commission,” he said. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.