Cape Town City coach Benni McCarthy could find himself in hot water after the Premier Soccer League (PSL) asked him to explain comments he made regarding refereeing towards the end of last year. “The PSL has written in terms of the NSL Handbook to Cape Town City and coach Mr Benni McCarthy regarding comments attributed to coach Mr McCarthy on 26 November 2017 towards match officials,” the league said in a statement. “The PSL has given Mr McCarthy and Cape Town City five days to respond to a letter from the PSL where he is to explain the comments.” McCarthy made the comments in question after a 2-2 draw against Lamontville Golden Arrows at the Princess Magogo Stadium. “Do you want my honest opinion about why there have been a lot of draws?” the former Bafana Bafana striker rhetorically asked at the time.
“It has been because of bad refereeing. That’s what is causing us to draw. Why must I shy away? “The referee is telling my players to fuck off, and we must say the referees are good. That’s what is causing the problem because if we had good officials, we will have matches that are fair. Teams will run away with games. “Most referees keep teams in the game. We don’t have officials who are taking care of the game because they are worried about their own egos, and as coaches and players, it is frustrating standing on the side. “We see it happening week-in and week-out.” It’s far from the first time McCarthy’s outspoken nature has got him into the spotlight in recent times. Last month he was fined R50 000 for calling match official Phillip Tinyani a “cow” following City’s loss to Chippa United. Half, however, was suspended until the end of the season. Just last month Muhsin Etrugal and McCarthy had a touchline altercation, with the former later coming out and labelling his opposite number a “baby”. McCarthy, of course, was unimpressed. Also of note this season was one-time Champions League winner’s rant against the City of Cape over the way the stadium situation has been handled. “Football has been sold lies in Cape Town,” he lamented. “When there is a private wedding, the stadiums are ready. When there’s a rugby competition, the stadiums are ready. When there’s a nitro circus car event, the stadiums are ready. For football, Cape Town’s World Cup stadium – unavailable. Athlone Stadium – used by a thousand tenants and has become a sand patch. Newlands – unavailable. Make an emergency plan at another venue across the entire Western Cape – um, sorry we didn’t think that far ahead.”