‘I’m very conscious,” says composer Paul Hanmer, “that by setting Setswana lyrics to the music, I’m not creating a ‘typical’ Mass —but then, I’m not of that tradition.” Hanmer is describing some of the choices he made while composing his new work, Mass for the 1st Peoples, which premiered as part of the Johannesburg International Mozart Festival last week. Alongside the Setswana lyric, the work also features passages for the udu (water vessel) drum of Nigeria’s Igbo and alludes to chord structures and rhythms more often associated with South African popular music. Multiple other points of reference include Mozart, the 15th-century Flemish composer Johannes Ockeghem and the strandlopers of Churchhaven, all of which Hanmer equitably embraces as components of his — and the music’s — African identity. Google “African Mass” and two works pop up most often: Father Guido Haazen’s 1958 Missa Luba, and David Fanshawe’s 1972 African Sanctus. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.