The editor of the Sunday newspaper Rapport has defended his editorial decision to publish an opinion piece by right-wing racist and apartheid apologist Steve Hofmeyr. On Sunday, Rapport published an opinion piece by Hofmeyr titled “Die val van ’n fout” which analysed the future of the country after President Cyril Ramaphosa’s rise to power. Rapport editor Waldimar Pelser told the Mail & Guardian that, like many Sunday papers, the Rapport does “not shy away from controversy” even if the “drastically opposing views shock, offend or sooth”. “Mr. Hofmeyr’s critics, in whose ranks we have been counted, too, might say that we should not have offered to publish this piece at all, given its content.
But then the content of the piece we published has not once been cited as the reason for this furore,” said Pelser. He said that the reason for the unhappiness with Hofmeyr’s oppinion in Rapport seems to be that a history of Hofmeyr’s comments and tirades over the years has rendered all of his opinions “unworthy of publication”. But prominent journalist and columnist Max du Preez in his unhappiness with his article tweeted: Responding to criticism led by Du Preez, Pelser tweeted on Sunday: Hofmeyr has become known for
defending the apartheid flag, and for tweeting that “blacks were the architects of apartheid”. According to Hofmeyr’s opinion piece, “The full reality of SA is beyond their comprehension because they could never escape the homeland mentality.” Some other users hit out, challenging Hofmeyr’s comment as unfounded for an individual who had never lived in a homeland. One Twitter user called for Hofmeyr to leave the country, another to banish him from social media, while most questioned Rapport’s editorial decision to publish the piece. Pelser said that he had published a piece of someone with a view and asked his detractors if his decision had been wrong. Many on twitter sided with Pelser, arguing that no-one should be censored — no matter how hated their opinion may be. While other tweets challenged the notion that Rapport’s publication of Hofmeyr’s piece was enabling free speech — arguing that it was just feeding fears and insecurities. Radio journalist Ilse Salzwedel tweeted that the Rapport needs to stop feeding the fear of right-wingers. Waldimar, I’m with
@MaxduPreez on this one. Take Afrikaans readers forward, not back. And I say this as a fellow journo, somebody actively involved in the fight against a corrupt govt AND a Rapport reader. Stop feeding the fear of rightwingers. All is not lost. We CAN fix SA — Ilse Salzwedel (@ilsesalzwedel)
February 18, 2018 Him spreading his DNA amongst afrikaner folk during his heyday should be considered a war crime. He’s probably dropped the collective intelligence by several IQ points — Asogan Moodaly (@AsoganMoodaly)
February 18, 2018 On Monday morning, Hofmeyr seemingly responded to all the heat by posting his monthly “racist check-in”. Hi everybody. Just doing my monthly Racist Check-in. pic.twitter.com/UIOq67ZniY — Steve Hofmeyr (@steve_hofmeyr) February 19, 2018