With severe drought conditions affecting large parts of the country and placing extreme strain on the supply of water for nearly four million Capetonians, Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba set aside R6‑billion to mitigate the effects of the drought. This amount includes disaster relief grants for provinces and municipalities to the tune of R437‑million. “Other conditional grants can be prioritised to respond to disasters if necessary,” he said. The budget allocation will be used for drought relief and to increase investment in public infrastructure. Co-operative governance and traditional affairs department spokesperson Legadima Leso told the Mail & Guardian that, although the funds are not ring-fenced for drought relief only, the ministry is pleased with the announcement as the money will be used for emergencies that may arise. “We welcome the announcement … as it will assist in terms of drought and also plans that may be put in place, especially in the most affected provinces, to [ensure] that we reverse the impact of drought on our communities,” said Leso. “South Africa is a water-scarce country and our climate is changing in ways that make the rainfall patterns far less predictable than in the past,” Gigaba said, urging South Africans to conserve water. The government is concerned about potential job losses in vulnerable farming communities that have suffered as a result of the drought. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.