In the past few months, much work has been done to stabilise the country’s most precarious state-owned enterprises (SOEs) but it is nowhere near finished. In the 2018 budget tabled by Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba, he made the point that state-owned entities still represent one of the largest, if not the largest, threat to the government’s carefully laid financial plans. Although the budget did not set aside specific amounts to recapitalise the parastatals, the treasury said some, such as the South African National Roads Agency Limited (Sanral), are going to need additional funds in the coming years. In outlining the main threats to the budget, the treasury said that if the risks posed by SOEs materialise, it could trigger a fiscal crisis and a downgrading of South Africa’s local currency credit rating. This could increase the cost of borrowing by an average of 2.4 percentage points in the coming three years and plunge the country into a multiyear recession. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.