I really enjoyed that [watching a movie for the first time] and thought, “Wow, that’s a lot of power.” People were there, paying money, to be moved by someone’s voice. I was just fascinated by that idea. The current media frenzy surrounding President Zuma and his exit has not made its way to his hometown of Nxamalala where residents are divided over his fate. Caron von Zeil, a Cape Town water activist, believes the ancient water flowing from Table Mountain could help lessen the pressure on the city’s demand. Up in flames: Mayor Patricia de Lille’s corruption accuser says his issue with her is not political, it’s about shack fires and her failure to prevent them. The National Lotteries Commission explains why a little NGO— which had never received funding before— could get R6-million which eventually made its way to the mega festival, Buyel’Ekhaya. The ConCourt is to hear the case of a whistle-blower who accused the Financial Services Board of “unlawfully” cancelling pension funds believed to total more than R20-billion. The Gauteng department of education filed papers to the ConCourt this week to appeal last month’s ruling that Hoërskool Overvaal does not have the capacity to convert to a dual-medium school in order to enrol 55 English-speaking pupils. “In the Zuma era, and particularly in its second half, both the ANC government and the body politic of this country have been suffering the symptoms of morbidity.” With the cards stacked against President Zuma, the question everyone is asking is: When exactly will he step down? Speculation is rife that Zuma will resign this weekend but according to insiders, only after the Feb 17 NEC meeting ‘’The most dangerous thing about national conferences of the ANC, and the ANCYL, is when people start nominating before processes open”— ANCYL national spokesperson Mlondi Mkhize. Supporters of KZN ANC provincial task team head Mike Mabuyakhulu have expressed suspicions of the circumstances and timing of his arrest on charges of fraud. Mbali Ntuli is set to shake up the province to win support, ruffling a few feathers in the process A KZN South Coast resort owner who was forced out of his business because of a dispute with a local traditional leader is suing the Ingonyama Trust Board for R6.5-million in damages. ‘Cancer I could deal with. Losing my breast I could not.’ Why a mastectomy may not be the only option for some cancer patients, via Bhekisisa. Harare East may be Zimbabwe’s richest and most influential constituency and because of the concentration of political and economic power in this part of the country, elections are always closely watched — and tightly fought. “Mugabe’s Zanu-PF was infamous for rigging elections and making a mockery of Zimbabwe’s democracy. If the first post-Mugabe vote is different, this will set a precedent that will be hard to reverse later.” Law of the gun: South Sudanese soldiers and commanders responsible for the forcible recruiting of thousands of children and other grave human rights abuses may be eligible to receive training from South Africa. Mob justice: In the heart of Gboko’s main market in central Nigeria, the stains where seven men were burned alive are still visible. Their crime? Having “light skin and looking like Fulanis”. Presidential elections in Guinea in 2010 and 2015, as well as a legislative ballot in 2013, were marred by violence and fraud accusations and now, the country’s 2018 local elections are following suit. PIC’s decision to extend a R5-million bridging loan to Eskom appears to have walked a fine line when it comes to the rules governing the management of public servants pensions. An innovative business rescue has preserved an asset that would be impossible to restart, in hopes that the commodity cycle will swing up again Top-down regulatory measures come to naught, so the battle must be fought from the bottom up “Finally, if a film shows people falling in love and the executive director of Man and Boy Foundation thinks this is wrong, one wonders what his foundation is teaching boys. How can love be wrong?” It is a feat to have a Mass that draws from a rich but distorted past to create a new musical canon Traditional leaders and local producers say a doctored clip insulting musangwe fighting is racist and demeaning Owning African mysticism: Zaza Hlalethwa reviews the cartoon ‘The Adventures of Noko Mashaba’ as the future of African narratives in the digital age. Jacana’s new imprint, Storied, will only publish African fiction in English, becoming the first to do so. It’s singular focus on fiction and developing writers and editors will also distinguish it from Jacana’s other imprint, BlackBird Books. The physical predicaments we experience go far further than what our conditioned minds perceive. Restaurant review: We could say ancient Indians invented portion control and smoothie bowls. But we don’t need to go around Columbising like that. Dinika Govender claps back at appropriation. The Ramaphosa faction is invested in accumulation through the market and has no vision for the impoverished masses “We must be clear: Zuma should have resigned a long, long time ago. He has been at the helm of abuses of the state and has now effectively rendered South Africa rudderless.” Inxeba is the collaborative work of some of the best of South Africa’s writers, actors, musicians and filmmakers and the film presents us with a view of ourselves in which we are brave enough to face what is difficult. “The only thing the ANC wants Daddy’s signature on right now is on his letter of resignation. Or on the employee section of his “don’t come Monday” letter if he doesn’t go by himself.” In seeking solutions for the current water crisis, Cape Town and other drought-prone areas should learn from the experiences of SA’s renewable energy programme, which worked with the private sector to produce electricity alongside Eskom. “How many of us have any serious knowledge of the local dams, the catchment areas and what’s done to water before it gets into our bathtubs?” Panicked Capetonians are asking the wrong question. The issue is not when Day Zero will see their taps turned off. That won’t happen this winter. They should be asking: What will happen next summer? From Jacob Zuma to Steinhoff, the National Prosecuting Authority has its work cut out for it. But can it rise to the occasion? What has made internet platforms so profitable has also left them vulnerable to manipulation by malign actors “When DJ Zinhle went back to work three weeks after giving birth, I recall people being all up in arms wondering, “OMG, what about the baby?” and I thought it was silly as hell.” “Of the three pressers, the Cape Town presser is, by this estimation, aloof, disconnected and indifferent and, quite frankly, in a sorry state.” Last year, programmes by the Early Learning Resource Unit in the Western Cape, Northern Cape and North West reached 9 391 children, 632 fieldworkers and 75 early childhood development centres. With its lengthy history of drug cheats, the Winter Olympics is working hard to clean up its act. South Africa has a strong women’s side, so why aren’t they getting the props they deserve?