Screenings of Inxeba (The Wound): The film of the moment follows the parallel stories of Kwanda (Niza Jay Ncoyini), a young adult from Johannesburg entering initiation school in the Eastern Cape and how his world and views collide with Xolani (Nakhane Touré), his sensitive but duplicitous khankatha who looks after him. This is a story of homosexual love in a setting that does much to quell expressions of same-sex love and heterogeneous masculinities — something the film’s protesters are arguing is for the protection of Xhosa culture.
Details: The film will be screened at The Bioscope in Johannesburg until February 15. Tickets cost R50. No under 16s allowed. For more information visit thebioscope.co.za and go to tickets.tixsa.co.za/event/inxeba-the-wound for the times the film will be screened. Samusha Weiri Dongo by Wallen Mapondera: Translated from Shona “samusha weiri dongo” means “household of a forsaken land”. Using a series of sculptural collages — constructed from discarded cardboard, plastic packaging and cotton thread — this body of work seeks to investigate the people, systems and events that have influenced Zimbabwe’s current affairs. Details: The exhibition is on until February 24 at SMAC Gallery, 19 Keyes Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg. For more information visit smacgallery.com iMfihlo Yobuhlalu exhibition: The secret of beads is revealed in this exhibition, shedding light on social structures and changing customs in Zulu culture. Beadwork has seen changes as a result of fashion trends, the migration of labour from homelands to cities and economic reasons among others. Curated by Anthea Martin and Hlengiwe Dube, the director of the Durban Art Gallery Mzuzile Mduduzi Xakaza says the exhibition was created to highlight the fact that traditional Zulu society has never been monolithic in terms of body adornment as a form of cultural expression. Details: The exhibition runs until April 29 2018. For more details call 031 311 2264. Kenna Mang by Lerato Lodi: With a focus on the ritual go phasa Badimo, during which ancestors are acknowledged or given thanks, Lerato Lodi uses the nude figure as a representation of the self in search of identity while paying homage to Badimo. As a contemporary fine artist with concepts strongly rooted in her belief system, she questions the relationship between her religious and traditional practices as Mostwana born and living in South Africa. Details: The exhibition at Art Lovers 1932, 198 Long Street, Waterkloof, Pretoria, until February 14. For more details call 012 346 6593.