Free State sports MEC Mathabo Leeto and Bloem Water CEO Limakatso Moorosi, who are facing charges of theft and corruption, were released on warning in the Bloemfontein Magistrate’s Court on Friday. The pair was warned to appear at the Bloemfontein High Court on March 2, Hawks regional spokesperson Captain S’fiso Nyakane said in a statement. Leeto, who is being touted as one of the frontrunners to replace Ace Magashule as ANC Free State chair, and Moorosi handed themselves over to the Hawks in Bloemfontein on Thursday. In 2009, Leeto was the mayor of Matjhabeng municipality when she allegedly awarded a tender of R15m to procure photocopy machines and to install telephonic systems as well as CCTV cameras for the municipality, allegedly without following correct tender processes. At the time Moorosi was the chief financial officer at the municipality. It is also alleged that the two received “gratification” from the company. Leeto was previously arrested and the case was withdrawn after her lawyers made representations.
The CEO did not face charges at the time. Following investigations, the charges were reinstated for the MEC. – News24 The Hawks have confirmed on Friday morning that they have arrested a Free State MEC, as well the CEO for Bloem Water, on charges of fraud and corruption. Sports MEC Mathabo Leeto, who is being touted as one of the frontrunners to replace Ace Magashule as ANC Free State chair, and Bloem Water CEO Limakatso Moorosi are expected to appear in the Bloemfontein Magistrate’s Court on Friday morning, spokesperson S’fiso Nyakane said. READ MORE: Hawks whistle-blower slain In 2008, Leeto was the mayor of Matjhabeng Municipality when she allegedly awarded a tender of R30-million to procure photocopy machines and to install telephonic systems, as well as CCTV cameras for the municipality, allegedly without following correct tender processes. READ MORE: Mud slung as Free State leadership race intensifies It is also alleged that the two received “gratification” from the company. Leeto was previously arrested and the case was withdrawn after her lawyers made representations. The CEO did not face charges at that time. Following investigations, the charges were reinstated for the MEC. – News24 This is a developing story and will be updated as more details emerge.