On a recent trip to Cape Town, a friend and fellow food lover called to invite me to explore a newish Indian restaurant in town. Acknowledging its unofficial tagline of “Indian tapas” (Cape Town-speak for European-friendly), we ventured into chef Liam Tomlin’s latest Asian restaurant endeavour in the suburb of Gardens: Thali. A total of R650 ventured out of my bank balance and out of my life for good that night, leaving me with nothing but hands still sticky from Thali’s “condensed milk-infused” class appropriation of what is otherwise an ancient, humble Vedic eating tradition. At a time when conversations about cultural appropriation are becoming more robust, more nuanced and (potentially) legally consequential — and as creative industries are more swiftly and publicly being dragged out by their ahistorical, synthetic feathers — it is necessary to talk about working-class exploitation. There is no single thali Although the exact history of thali is difficult to trace with certainty (autonomous records get fuzzy pre-colonialism), there is certainly a lot more to thali than the metal tray and small curry-filled katoris (bowls) we typically associate it with. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.