Live Art Network Africa: The Institute for Creative Arts is presenting the launch of the Live Art Network Africa, an event comprising a symposium, performances and networking sessions. The programme features national and international curators and artists, as well as academics who straddle the fields of art and academia, live art research and criticism.
They include Panaibra Canda, Christian Etongo, Jelili Atiku, Khwezi Gule, Same Mdluli, Catherine Boulle, and Nelisiwe Xaba. Details: From February 17 to 20 at the University of Cape Town’s Hiddingh Campus, 31-37 Orange Street, Gardens, Cape Town. For more information visit ica.uct.ac.za Moonlight Movie in the Park: Whether you’re snuggling with a bae or need time to chill with your besties, Relish Bistro in Pretoria is offering a night under the stars. Even though it will be three days late, you get to watch a cheesy romcom and do other Valentine’s Day things. Details: On February 17 from 7pm at Relish Bistro, Springbok Park, Grosvenor and Pretorius streets, Hatfield. Standard tickets range from R80 to R100 and VIP tickets go for R150 a person. For more information call 012 430 3449 or email info@rellishbistro.co.za Everything I Never Told You: Using pen and ink drawings on lightweight acid-free paper, Durban artist Bernice Scott’s new solo exhibition considers a less obvious and opposing view of the female body. Details: Everything I Never Told You will be on display at Artplus Studio 32 Gallery, 32 Solstice Road, uMhlanga Ridge, KwaZulu-Natal until March 1. Visit artplus.co.za or call 031 584 7016 for more details. Loving Vincent: Join The Henry George Gallery in being among the first to preview the world’s first painted feature film about the final days of Vincent van Gogh. Loving Vincent premiered in New York in September last year. The film of animated oil paintings gives the effect of Van Gogh’s vivid figures having come to life. The film’s plot considers what might have happened if Van Gogh did not kill himself, but was in fact murdered. Details: Join the soiree on Saturday February 17 from 6.30pm to 9pm at 45 6th Street, Parkhurst, Johannesburg. Seats are limited so booking is essential. Entrance is R250 a person and includes cocktail snacks, two glasses of wine and the movie. Email mandy@henrygeorge.co.za or darryl@henrygeorge.co.za to book.