Two SAA executives have been fired but the hearing also fingered the former chairperson Although the ANC has won some of its provincial court battles, it still faces several more as its top leadership continues to resolve the gridlock caused by factional conflict in its lower structures. The secretary general’s supporters claim he is not consulted on matters that fall under his office Less talk and more action — that is the strategy the ANC will adopt in the run-up to the 2019 elections. The party’s hands-on approach under President Ramaphosa will resonate with voters when it begins campaigning, according to the ANC chairperson of organising and campaigning, Senzo Mchunu. The controversial politician hopes to regain public confidence in the ANC Ten years after the initial complaint, a call for a judge’s recusal could stall the judicial conduct tribunal before it starts It’s alleged that large sums of money were allocated to firms without following due process We’ve just learned that brain-hijacking parasites can bend even uninfected bystanders to their will On Monday, an interim interdict banning residents from holding unauthorised protests at the refinery was granted ‘I do not know where I will have my party but I have already spoken to Mama about it’ With the party eyeing control of three provinces, there is no shortage of takers for the top positions Black teachers say they were segregated from their white counterparts and were undermined Where else would we go? ask Nama descendants who fret that communal land will be taken.
Some still follow traditional ways, writes Carl Collison KwaDlovinga residents are fighting to secure title deeds for land they lost to the traditional authority in the area An Ingonyama Trust challenge to the land reform process could see a landmark ruling A toxic mix of bureaucratic failure, tensions between local government and traditional leaders and infighting among residents has slowed down the process of land restitution in KwaZulu-Natal. Present were white landowners with their 4x4s and landless black people from shantytowns, who came in minibuses. When religion trumps science in medicine, women’s bodies and constitutional rights may be caught in the crossfire The health minister will be met with court cases from the private healthcare sector while dealing with pressure from trade unions to speed up the process. A Dutch company holds the patent for Ethiopia’s most popular ancient food — but now Ethiopia wants its intellectual property back Reactions to attacks in Zim and Ethiopia will reveal new leaders’ commitment to reform My country is not independent. It’s an open-air prison; a corrupt mafia state Senior revenue service executives tell the Nugent inquiry how their ‘higher purpose’ was subverted Although some people do not mind how the platform is managed, or even the occasional joke or message from a colleague, others find it an unwelcome distraction, according to a social media poll by the Mail & Guardian. For all the bluster, the proposed legislation has left industry experts in the dark about key issues Small differences in fund management fees can be an investment killer in the long term Despite some concessions, the draft charter still has provisions that investors find unpalatable South Africa’s job opportunities, established education system and modern technology attract skilled immigrants to the country, the report noted Your data is giving Big Tech control of everything and only a huge shift by the people can halt it ‘As the M&G turns its focus to allegations of abuse of power in the NGO space, our work has been met with hostility. And it has left us perplexed’ Readers write in about Neville Alexander, South Africa’s immigration policies and land reform Claimants told sad tales of dispossession but they are dogged in their bid to get it back The family of a former Lesotho army chief demand justice and a return to the rule of law in the country Thirty-nine years after the events of June 16 1976, the #FeesMustFall movement, which began on October 12 2015, led to protests by university students about the high tuition fees at South African universities XXXTentacion’s demise shows how victims are painted as being out to ruin a perpetrator’s life “Hello friends! This is note from Igor, your goalie. I’m just writing to say hi, we haven’t spoken for maybe forever.” His legacy is couched in cisheteropatriarchy; social justice and equality need a new approach A key focus of the first Wikimania conference in sub-Saharan Africa, which was held in Cape Town last week, was on increasing regional contributions to the world’s largest free, collaboratively built online encyclopedia. “I used to think it was “molo”, until I learned that that is a naturalised pronunciation of the Afrikaans “môre”.  An indigenous greeting, therefore, is a very profound mutual agreement between people.” The custodian of the oldest independent cinema and entertainment company in South Africa, Moosa Moosa of the Avalon Group, died in Johannesburg on Monday, aged 75. In your list this week: Freshwater by Akwaeke Emezi, Bhoza by Darkie Fiction, and Diana Vreeland: The Eye Has to Travel. Mamela Nyamza is heading for the Grahamstown festival but after that plans to hang up her dancing shoes David Goldblatt has left South African documentary photography incalculably richer, writes Niren Tolsi This year’s Berlin Biennale poses questions about otherness, power, violence and patriarchy The South African artist’s new film about a rape challenges the curators and concepts of art The dance space, be it legendary clubs such as downtown Durban’s 101 or the ubiquitous, cyberspace clubs offered by cellphones and social media, the culture of gqom is propelled by vocalists and DJs as much as, if not more, by dancers He is all passion and there’s no holding back when presented with a good wicket or a big player The continent has everything it takes to win the World Cup, so why the repeated failures? The toxic debates that have dogged former titans demonstrate how national attitudes shape team performance