Beleaguered SA Revenue Service boss Tom Moyane is fast running out of options to prevent a commission of inquiry into his conduct at the tax authority from continuing. READ MORE: Moyane ready for court battle to stop SARS inquiry The delicate matter of racism has once again been raised, after Johannesburg resident Tennille Aron had her restaurant bill labelled “Indian” while she attended a friend’s birthday festivities. The DA-led City of Tshwane has botched an opportunity to alleviate tough financial conditions at the South African capital with a planned bond auction last Tuesday following a procedural error. Municipalities that deposited R1.6-billion with failed VBS Mutual Bank stand to lose most of their money, worsening their already dire financial position and increasing the risk for violent protests. READ MORE: Reserve Bank — No guarantee municipalities will get VBS money back Judge Nugent rejects Moynae’s bid to stop Sars probe Suspended South African Revenue Service Commissioner Tom Moyane now wants President Cyril Ramaphosa to either halt his disciplinary hearing or abandon the commission of inquiry into governance at the tax agency. READ MORE: Sars inquiry to continue despite Moyane’s objection Summons issued for ex-president’s son to appear in court over the death of taxi passengers. Zuma junior is thought to be out of the country despite news of his brother’s death. Pastor Sthembiso Zondo, the man with the famous 4-5, is back.
The popular pastor was taken off air after a video of him seen naked went viral. Against the backdrop of a reeling economy and a shrinking tax base, Finance Minister Nhlanhla Nene has set a target of collecting R1.3-trillion in taxes this year, a mark an analyst says is ‘unlikely’. Tow of South Africa’s leading economists say Opec is at fault. The World Health Organization has made it official: Digital games can be addictive, and those addicted to them need help. In the latest edition of its International Classification of Diseases, or ICD, the United Nations agency concluded that people whose jobs, educations, family or social lives have been upended by video games probably meet the criteria for a new form of addiction called “gaming disorder.” (The Washington Post) Tesla Inc (TSLA.O) nearly produced 5 000 Model 3 electric sedans in the last week of its second quarter, with the final car rolling off the assembly line on Sunday morning, several hours after the midnight goal set by Chief Executive Elon Musk, two workers at the factory told Reuters. (Reuters) It’s not a good time to be a 65-year-old Polish Supreme Court justice. Poland’s controversial overhaul of its judicial system takes effect on July 3 and —thanks to a lowering of the retirement age from 70 to 65 — nearly 40% of the judges on the country’s highest court could be forced to step down. That’s why the European Commission brought things much closer to a courtroom showdown on July 2, sending a “Letter of Formal Notice” to the country’s government to protest implementation of the change. (Quartz)