Former top cop Mzwandile Petros has lost a contract worth millions of rand that the State Information Technology Agency unlawfully awarded his forensic investigation and intelligence-gathering company, The Firm. Cash-strapped consumers should brace themselves for even higher fuel prices as key economic factors contribute to rocketing fuel costs. READ MORE: Inland petrol price climbs up to over R16/litre Absa has overhauled its retail and business banking unit, cutting the leadership team in half and hanging out voluntary severance packages, as the bank undergoes its most critical strategic shift since its formation in 1991. In a move that is likely to create more uncertainty in the petroleum sector, Mineral Resources Minister Gwede Mantashe last week published a notice of restricting applications for oil and gas exploration and development in order to allow his department to change its licensing process. Transactions with associate companies stretching back years are behind much of the €12.8-billion wiped off Steinhoff Internationals books, and the board has warned there may be more to come. The murder of a woman is a crime against her and a crime against the nation. And for those who think the situation is improving, think again. READ MORE: Youth is not an excuse Cash-strapped conusmers are going to feel the pinch as bus and taxi fares increase. In setting a new SA 800m record at the weekend, Caster Semenya lifted off the negativity that had overshadowed her on-track performance for the past weeks in the best possible way. An expert has warned the impact of the latest fuel price hike — effective from midnight tomorrow — will be severe and he has urged government to seek solutions. The party’s high court defeat against the Cape Town mayor could have serious ramifications. When Rokhaia Naassan gives birth in the coming days, she and her baby boy will enter a new category in the eyes of Danish law.
Because she lives in a low-income immigrant neighborhood described by the government as a “ghetto,” Rokhaia will be what the Danish newspapers call a “ghetto parent” and he will be a “ghetto child.” (The New York Times) Controversial anti-terror legislation requiring Russian telecom companies to store users’ communications entered into force on Sunday, leaving providers scrambling to implement the government’s demands. (The Moscow Times) Uganda’s government has kept its promise: Many Ugandans woke up on July 1 to find that if they hadn’t paid the new tax on social-media use, services like WhatsApp, Twitter, Facebook and Skype were inaccessible. (Quartz)