It’s Personal by Langa Mavuso: After recording in Europe, soul singer Mavuso is back on home soil to deliver his latest single, It’s Personal. This single follows the success of songs such as Sunday Blues and Home.
Details: The showcase is on July 27 at 8pm, the Soweto Theatre, corner of Bolani Link and Bolani Road, Jabulani, Soweto. Tickets cost R100 or R120 at the door. For more information visit https://www.sowetotheatre.com. Red Bull Reign national finals: Every year Red Bull sets out on a quest to find the world’s finest streetball players in a three-on-three basketball tournament. Qualifiers took place in Johannesburg, Cape Town and Durban and the top 24 teams will compete in Jo’burg this weekend for a place in the world finals in Washington, United States. Details: The games begin at 10am on July 28 at the Ponte Tower Basketball Courts, corner Lily Avenue and Abel Road, Berea. Seven Colour Sundays: On the last Sunday of each month, a food market that pays homage to the South African Sunday meals. The day is also a platform to showcase the booming music scene with live performances and DJ sets. Details: The feast will take place on July 29 at Soweto Theatre. Tickets cost R20 with a R60 cooler box fee at the venue. For more information contact: Tshepo Phetlhu 0n 081 551 8923 and Simphiwe Twala on 081 581 7618 or visit sowetotheatre.com/seven-colour-sundays Durban International Film Festival: The University of KwaZulu-Natal’s Centre for Creative Arts,presents the 39th edition of the festival. The 10-day event brings new feature, documentary and short films from around the globe. There will also be seminars and workshops presented by notable figures in the industry. Details: The festival runs from July  20 to July 29 at various venues in the greater Durban area. For an up-to-date schedule and entry into the various events visit durbanfilmfest.co.za. Ukumisa Insika by Wonder Buhle Mbambo: The Durban Art Gallery is hosting Wonder Buhle Mbambo’s first solo exhibition, Ukumisa Insika, which can loosely be translated to mean “grooming the breadwinner”. The artist grew up in the rural village of KwaNgcolosi, near Inanda Dam in KwaZulu-Natal. The exhibition is personal as he unpacks the role he was brought up to play as a man in his family. Details: Ukumisa Insika is on at the Durban Art Gallery in the City Hall until September 9. For more information contact 031 311 2264