The Bubbly Festival: Bubbly connoisseurs can spend their weekend popping corks, filling flutes and sipping some of the best of South African cap classique and champagne. Fine food and live music are also on the menu.
Details: The Park House of Events on 7, corner of Jan Smuts Avenue and William Nicol Drive, 6th Road, Hyde Park, Johannesburg. The dates are: May 18 from 5pm to 9pm; May 19 from 11am to 3pm and 5pm to 9pm; May 20 from 11am to 3pm. Tickets are available from webtickets.co.za at R380 for a glass of bubbly and 10 tasting coupons. My Hole My Home: The Market Theatre Foundation presents the premiere of John Moalusi Ledwaba’s last play, My Hole My Home. He died in December last year. Directed by Phala Oakeditse Phala and starring Mandla Gaduka and Seneliso Dladla, the play is about the plight of two homeless men living on the streets of Johannesburg, which provide roots, identity, security, a sense of belonging and a place of emotional wellbeing. Details: The Market Theatre, 56 Margaret Mcingana Street, Newtown, Johannesburg, until June 3. Tickets cost R90 to R150. To book, call 011 832 1641, extension 203 or 204. The KZN Heritage Ensemble: Joburg Theatre celebrates Africa Month with a special performance by the KZN Heritage Ensemble. Founded by award-winning vocalist Mbuso Khoza, the 16-strong a capella group perform amahubo, African songs traditionally sung by AbeNguni griots and composers that capture historically significant moments that future generations can learn from. Details: The ensemble will perform from May 18 to 20 at the Joburg Theatre, Loveday and Hoofd streets, Braamfontein. Tickets go for R150 to R300 and can be purchased at joburgtheatre.com or call 0861 670 670. Shady Tactics: Curated by Thuli Gamedze, this group exhibition is a series of interventions that take the strategic mechanism of politicised playfulness seriously. These propose a number of alternatives — new, incorrect uses for things, along with incomplete and drifting ideas, failures, jokes and strange approaches to logic. With leanings toward work that expresses itself through playful repetition, rambling installation and acute political concern, shady tactics can be seen as a kind of dystopian flea market of high anxiety, lurking sadness and creepy laughter. Details: The exhibition will take place at SMAC Gallery, 145 Sir Lowry Road, Woodstock, Cape Town, until June  9. For more information go to smacgallery.com