Lonmin’s management stands to lose control of the company to administrators if a proposed R5-billionn takeover by Sibanye-Stillwater fails. A dispute over procedure threatens to derail the disciplinary hearing of suspended South African Revenue Service (Sars) boss Tom Moyane. Trade and Industry Minister Rob Davies is concerned about the state of the South African Bureau of Standards (SABS) and has instructed the agency’s board to urgently oversee the development of a turnaround strategy. Worshippers flock to Kingdom Prayer Ministry to ask for divine intervention. Cape Town’s acting mayor, Ian Nielson, has postponed the appointment of mayoral committee members until today. President Cyril Ramaphosa has urged supporters of murdered Councillor Musawenkosi “Maqatha” Mchunu to remain calm as the matter is investigated. One of the poorest provinces in the country is facing billions of rands in legal claims against it, with the administration facing more than 1 000 pending civil suits. The high number of politically connected killings in KwaZulu-Natal are nothing new and may even escalate, as politics of principle have made way for politics of subsistence. The so-called bomb – made out of a PVC pipe, an old Nokia cellphone, and some wires – found inside the Imam Hussein Mosque on Sunday night was not a bomb and probably would not have worked. Afri-Forum CEO says only 600 people were murdered by the racist apartheid regime. Government has pulled its ambassador to Israel out after an attack that resulted in more than 50 people reportedly killed and over 1 000 injured. ANC head of elections Fikile Mbalula has warned ministers, premiers and councillors who are lazy that they will be fired by President Cyril Ramaphosa’s administration. An Orkney, North West woman had a hellish Mother’s Day when a group of about 15 illegal miners gang-raped her. Buses countrywide should run as normal this morning, as the protracted bus strike is finally over. The death of a nine-year-old Winterveld, Tshwane child, who was electrocuted on Saturday, might have been caused by negligence on the part of a contractor assigned to electrify part of the informal settlement.