A sister-in-law of Zulu King Goodwill Zwelithini has been appointed as acting chief executive of the embattled Ingonyama Trust Board (ITB), following the resignation of Dr Fikisiwe Madlopha last month. The monarch is the sole trustee of the Ingonyama Trust, set up on the eve of the 1994 elections to secure his participation and that of the Inkatha Freedom Party. The trust controls about three million hectares of tribal land, which previously made up the KwaZulu Bantustan. Thembeka Ndlovu, the younger sister of the monarch’s fourth wife, Thandekile Ndlovu, known as MaNdlovu, has been appointed to act in the R2‑million-a-year post until a replacement is found for Madlopha, who left to pursue private business interests. Ndlovu, a former teacher who worked at the rural development and land reform department, was appointed as acting chief executive on April 1.  She had been a deputy director with the rural development department at Richards Bay, a high-level post in the civil service. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.