The referendum was the latest sign of a drift toward liberalism in a country that only recently installed a gay man as prime minister and allowed same-sex marriage. (The New York Times) The party and allied groups are spending more than $4-million on a handful of chaotic congressional races that are critical to Democrats’ strategy to win the House in November.
(The New York Times) The president’s allies say he has every right to manage the executive branch and every reason to be outraged at possible misconduct aimed at his campaign. Critics say he is wreaking untold damage on institutions that form the bulwark of a democratic society. (The New York Times) Unlike Britain, the other major coloniser of Africa, France’s post-colonial ties have remained firm, through major upheaval and economic change. (Quartz) SA will have to wait until late 2018 to see whether it can do enough to boost its economic growth rate and fix its public finances to persuade the most sceptical of the three ratings agencies to look at restoring its investment-grade rating. Sygnia plans to join the class action to be instituted by Deminor Recovery Services against Steinhoff, after it lost R316-million on the stock’s collapse. Friends of a 33-year-old mother who was killed, allegedly by an ex-boyfriend in Mabopane, are shattered that all the warning signs of an impending tragedy were there. Tamaryn Green says she is excited to represent women in her new role. ” I am looking forward to getting to know our country even more.” The race to succeed former Mpumalanga ANC chairman and current deputy president David Mabuza is getting dirty as party members carried guns to a regional conference this weekend. Thandi Modise said she does not want to be North West’s premier. “No one as said I will be deployed as premier again,” Modise said. The Hawks are probing eThekwini mayor Zandile Gumede for alleged money laundering, fraud and corruption. Mobile network giants MTN and Vodacom are entangled in a fresh row over a multi-million rand cellphone and data tender with state-owned freight and rail transport company Transnet. The National Freedom Party says senseless killings of politicians in KZN have reached alarming levels and has called on President Ramaphosa to declare a state of emergency in the province. READ MORE: Political killings in KZN continue The Citizen Tshwane Metro Police Department officers stood helplessly by while members of the EFF took over their premises and barricaded the entrance to the department’s head offices with burning tyres. The DA has refuted weekend news reports it is facing a split and that there are moves to oust the party’s federation council chairperson James Selfe due to his alleged shoddy handling of the Patricia de Lille saga.