Coronation Fund Managers, one of the largest shareholders in Steinhoff when it announced “accounting irregularities” in December, will be taking legal action against the company. Suzanne Daniels – a whistle-blower on the Gupta family’s alleged capture of Eskom – will on Monday face disciplinary charges that could cost her her job. Minister in the Presidency Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma will on Tuesday announce details of the takeover of the troubled North West by the national government. Family says unrestrained psychiatric patient assaulted him with a drip stand in a ward. A week before plunging to his death from the third floor of a high-rise student residence in Braamfontein, Johannesburg, Sanele Dlamini had complained bitterly to his sister about a stolen laptop. Former North West ANC deputy chairman China Dodovu has called on the party’s top six officials to reprimand embattled North West premier Supra Mahumapelo for defying the national leadership. Axed Cape Town mayor Patricia de Lille says claims that she tried to influence a decision to appoint Achmat Ebrahim as city manager for the City of Cape Town. Police have shut down the “residence of horrors” in Protea Glen, Soweto where 29 schoolboys were allegedly raped or repeatedly beaten by their coach. After two embarrassing defeats in court, the regulator takes aim at an escape clause in the credit act, and says it plans to appeal the recent club card ruling that it had no case against Lewis. Since whistleblower Nomawethu Kunene disappeared on 26 February, her anxious family has been pleading for her safe return. President Cyril Ramaphosa said he would meet ANC structures this week to resolve the problems in North West. Hawks in KwaZulu-Natal are questioning two men suspected of killing the ANC Lower South Coast branch treasurer. The ANC and President Cyril Ramaphosa were among those conveying their condolences to the loved ones of veteran photographer, Masana Samuel “Sam” Nzima, 83. Water and sanitation Minister Gugile Nkwinti was spitting fire, demanding answers from the authorities as to why Limpopo communities still lived in abject thirst – despite government having spent R3.5-billion on the Presidential Giyani Emergency Water Intervention, which was initially supposed to cost only R502-million. Regional HIV/Aids activists are demanding an in-depth independent investigation into the alleged culture of silence – and victimisation – within the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/Aids (Unaids) organisation.