African central bank leaders are currently discussing whether to hold the yuan as part of their foreign reserves, highlighting the Chinese money’s rise as one of the world’s major reserve currencies. (Quartz) When Kenya announced it would close the Dadaab refugee camp in May 2016, the world reacted with shock and recriminations.
The camp was in fact never closed largely due to a Kenya High Court decision. (The Conversation) Ms. Barr cited “The Planet of the Apes” in discussing Valerie Jarrett, a black woman and former adviser to President Barack Obama. ABC Entertainment’s president called it “abhorrent.” (The New York Times) Court documents have shown how a top SABC executive deceived their CFO into bankrolling her family and friends’ travel and accommodation expenses, at a time when the public broadcaster was cash-strapped. Public Service and Administration Minister Ayanda Dlodlo has warned her colleagues in the executive not to employ more people than provided by regulations, and or fill posts with contracts that will go on after the elections next year. With four out of every 10 marriages ending in divorce, it is little wonder South Africans are refusing to say ‘I do’. Only 2.5 out of every 1000 residents choose the odd ball and chain, StatsSA says. Parliament moved one step closer to the criminalisation of hate speech yesterday when the department of justice and constitutional development introduced the Prevention and Combating of Hate Crimes and Hate Speech Bill. An old man walked away with nothing after dedicating his life to working at a farm for 69 years Managers employed at poorly performing KZN municipalities will have to pay back money paid to them as bonuses or salary increments during the 2016/17 financial year. Cops have arrested a 42-year-old for allegedly killing his 39-year-old partner on Elias Motsoaledi Road in Mofolo, Soweto. 10 men at the very top of the SAPS structure are being investigated for charges including corruption. READ MORE: Cele’s inherited headache: 10 top cops under investigation Two months into the new financial year, Eskom says it has successfully raised more than R13-billion, narrowing its funding gap to R58-billion for the year ending March 2019. Short-seller Viceroy’s attacks on Capitec have no validity, Reserve Bank deputy governor Kuben Naidoo sad. READ MORE: Viceroy may attack another SA company this week — Capitec CEO