General Kim Yong Chol—the highest-ranking North Korean to visit the US since 2000—will meet with US secretary of state Mike Pompeo. Preparations for a June 12 summit that was nominally canceled by Trump are once again underway.
(Quartz) The Trump administration said that it would proceed with plans to impose a series of punitive trade-related measures on China in the next month. The move increases pressure on China to make concessions in trade talks. (The New York Times) Kenya’s new Computer and Cyber Crime Act must not be abused by the criminal justice system. (The Conversation) READ MORE: Kenya signs bill criminalising fake news After months of giving a primetime network platform to one of America’s most famous celebrity racists, ABC has announced that it is cancelling Roseanne because she tweeted something explicitly racist. (The Outline) As her subjects have expanded, her audience has, too, but visibility has its drawbacks. (The New Yorker) Trump Administration officials are acting as if there is a secure system in place for dealing with children who are taken away from their parents at the border when there is not. (The New Yorker) A video game that let players simulate a school shooting was set to come out on Steam, the PC’s biggest platform for buying and selling games. But Valve Corporation, which runs Steam, has taken it down. (Vox) Insults flew across the floor as political parties held nothing back before finally agreeing to pass the R59-million Joburg budget in a heated sitting The Walter Sisulu University student who spent more than R800 000 after millions were mistakenly deposited into her account is the only one who has been arrested for the bizarre case. READ MORE: NSFAS big spender to have her day in court ANC SG Ace Magashule has claimed the killings of numerous councillors and other political office bearers in KZN were not politically motivated. MK veterans rallied to protect one of their own yesterday against a possible attack from enraged Mamelodi residents. The 72-year-old comrade is accused of raping a 12-year-old girl. The board of the Public Investment Corporation exonerated CEO Dan Matjila of corruption charges in September 2017, even though the evidence on which it is based its decision was incomplete. Mayor Herman Mashaba’s coalition partners turned on him on Tuesday when they dealt his 2018-19 budget a huge blow, rejecting his planned tariffs and rates increases. Tsonga disco king Penny Penny is embroiled in a nasty fight for money with one of the big banks. Screaming children in the middle of the night alerted neighbours to the Hawk’s arrest of a mother and her co-accused in connection with a cash-in-transit heist. According to Mlindwa Gumede, Parliament did not have enough time to discuss the Gupta family’s citizenship yesterday. Tshwane mayor Solly Msimanga wants people to report foul play relating to the provision of electricity. Here’s what is happening in and affecting South Africa today.