England manager Gareth Southgate on Wednesday named his 23-man squad for the World Cup. AFP Sport looked at the social media response from Southgate’s players: “After years of standing on the touchline in the cold and rain, Mum, we’re off to the World Cup.” — Manchester United striker Marcus Rashford. “I’ve dreamed of going to a World Cup since I was a kid.
Today that dream came true, an honour to represent the Three Lions this summer!” — Liverpool’s uncapped youngster Trent Alexander-Arnold. “Can’t wait to get there and do the fans proud! Thank you for all your kind messages!” — Manchester City defender Kyle Walker. “Maybe this picture said I was gonna live my dream and go to a World Cup ... dreams do come true.” — Manchester United defender Ashley Young wrote, alongside a photo of him in an England kit as a child. “Every call-up is an honour, but a World Cup call-up is something extra special! I’ve always dreamt of this moment and can’t wait for the next couple of months. Let’s go England.” — Stoke goalkeeper Jack Butland. “It’s an honour to be named in the England squad for the World Cup. … Get me to Russia!” — Tottenham midfielder Dele Alli. “What an honour! No words to describe the feeling right now. Can’t wait to get going! See you in Russia.” — Leicester striker Jamie Vardy. “It’s a privilege and an honour to be selected for England to go to the WC2018 in Russia. Cannot wait to get out there and do the fans proud! Let’s do this!” — Arsenal forward Danny Welbeck. “Dreams come true and hard work pays off. Now let’s get it.” — Manchester United forward Jesse Lingard. “It’s an honour to be named in the England squad. Can’t wait for my first World Cup and to meet up with the lads. We will give it our all.” — Tottenham defender Kieran Trippier “What a feeling to be named in the World Cup squad. It’s an absolute honour. Let’s go make some unbelievable memories. Bring it on.” — Leicester defender Harry Maguire. A frustrated Arsenal midfielder Jack Wilshere was left out of the squad but he took the snub in his stride. Responding to a tweet asking whether he wanted to go on holiday to Zante, Wilshere jokingly wrote: “Let me know the dates and I’m in. Can I bring the baby as well?” — AFP