Masters of Modernism at Keyes Art Mile: The 2018 season of Art & Design Saturday at Keyes Art Mile brings together new and established creative voices, providing a space for both critical engagement and laid-back entertainment. Masters of Modernism: Exploring Craftsmanship in Design includes a unique collection of historical and catalyst pieces of future design.
Details: The exhibition is on May 12 from 10am to 3pm at the Keyes Art Mile, 19 Keyes Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg. Entry is free. Madness and Civilisation: Kudzanai Chiurai’s ongoing interest in the cyclical nature of struggle, liberation and freedom is brought to light in Madness and Civilisation. The exhibition takes its title from Michel Foucault’s book, Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason. For Chiurai, the ideas in this work relate to a central concern of his: Was the colonial project of “cultural disarmament” so effective that Africa will never be able to imagine a future that has not been predetermined by its colonial past? Details: The exhibition takes place until May 12 at the Goodman Gallery, 176 Sir Lowry Road, Foreshore, Cape Town. Admission is free. How Long?: This dramatic musical play with political undertones, in Gibson Kente’s township theatre style, is based on the death of a helpless Khulu by brutal police action and apartheid bureaucracy. It is part of a trilogy of political plays written by Kente. It was last performed in 1973 and was then banned. Details: How Long? will run at the Playhouse Company, 29 Anton Lembede Street, Durban, until May 27. Tickets range from R30 to R150 and can be purchased from Computicket. For more information visit playhousecompany.com Mother’s Day Rooftop Yoga: For all those who celebrate Mother’s Day, join a yoga session dedicated to mothers. The session will be a feminine Yin Yoga Class and who will be given a glass of bubbly. Details: The yoga session will take place on May 13 at Jackson’s Real Food Market, 300 Bryanston Drive, Bryanston, Sandton. Please bring your own yoga mat as mats are limited. Entry is R100.