SA’s R587-billion public-sector wage bill had shot through the ceiling and the government would have to cut back on critical services if it failed to rein in pay increases, Public Services and Administration Minister Ayanda Dlodlo said on Tuesday. READ MORE: Public service wages on up and up  Kumba, SA’s largest iron-ore producer, told overseas customers it could not meet contractual supply agreements because of an unusually high number of derailments on the railway line linking its Northern Cape mines to the Saldanha port. Coronation, bloodied from a R14-billion loss on Steinhoff, was applying a “higher level of scepticism” to its investment approach, CEO Anton Pillay said on Tuesday. READ MORE: Snubbing Steinhoff has paid off Cash heists were yesterday confirmed as being largely inside jobs, after a security guard from a prominent company is believed to have stored his share of the spoils at the homes of two relatives in Ekurhuleni. Former president Jacob Zuma’s son Edward Zuma might find himself in hot water within the ANC after he was found guilty yesterday by the Equality Court in Durban of hate speech against senior party leaders. With Jacob Zuma’s son, Edward, fined thousands of rands and ordered to say sorry to SA after he insulted ministers Pravin Gordhan and Derek Hanekom, it’s clear hate speech days are over, says expert. Tshwane’s MMC for environment and agriculture says that not all open spaces are for human settlement. Factory says rules are not racist but boost productivity. He’s young, good looking and lives like a king. Thato Goapatwe was admired on social media, drives fast cars, and wears the fanciest clothes.
But the high-flyer’s wings have been clipped by the Hawks. Henry Ford, an avowed racist and anti-Semite, had a very specific plan, a powerful weapon in a war against what he saw as a Jewish jazz dance conspiracy: square dancing. In his booklet The International Jew, Ford wrote that “jazz is a Jewish creation” and that the “musical slush” was invading “decent homes.” So he poured a small fortune into trying to make old-fashioned dancing happen again. Dozens of Western and Chinese journalists will attend the closure of the Punggye-ri site as soon as Wednesday, though diplomatic uncertainties remain. The demolition may mean little without verification by outside experts. In one particularly uncomfortable moment, Nigel Farage, former leader of the UK Independence Party, told the Facebook CEO that without social media, Trump and Brexit wouldn’t have happened.