African Celebrations at the University of Johannesburg Weekend of Jazz: The festivities fall over the Africa Day weekend, with Friday night featuring performances by world music band Sun Xa Experiment, R&B soul singer Langa Mavuso and local Afro-Balkan legends Bombshelter Beast. On Saturday, catch jazz trumpeter Mandla Mlangeni, the Jazz Cats and songbird Zoë Modiga.
Ease into Sunday afternoon with a picnic in the company of the Steve Dyer Quartet. Details: UJ Arts Centre on the university’s Auckland Park campus, Johannesburg, from May 25 to 27. Tickets are available at the door, or visit arts.uj.ac.za The Ninevites pop-up launch: The Ninevites is a collaborative platform and design studio that explores under-told narratives from Southern Africa using textiles, design and imagery. This weekend, the Ninevites will launch their latest collection of hand-woven rugs and throws, and Gold Bottom Pots will showcase their new collection of handmade pot plants. Details: 99 Juta Street, Braamfontein, Johannesburg, on May 26 from 9am to 4pm. Entry is free. Visit theninevites.net Sunday Jazz Sundowners with Morning Stars: If you’re in the mood for Afrobeats infused with jazz, head to the BAT Centre for the Sunday Jazz Sundowners show, which will close off May on a high note by hosting Nigerian band Morning Stars. Details: BAT Music Café, Victoria Embankment, Durban, on May 27 from 3pm. Free admission. Visit batcentre.co.za Zakifo Benefit Concert: As part of the 100 years of Madiba celebration, this weekend the BAT Centre will host music lovers from across the world. The harbour waterfront will come alive with the sounds of music from South African icon Sipho “Hotstix” Mabuse, Guinean kora maestro Sekou Kouyate and Cape Verdean songstress Elida Almeida. Details: BAT Centre, Victoria Embankment, Durban, on May 25 from 6pm. Tickets are R150. Visit zakifo.nutickets.co.za/musicfestival The Fun’s Not Over: The James Phillips Story: Pioneering rocker James Phillips, leader of The Cherry-Faced Lurchers and creator of the satirical Afrikaans troubadour Bernoldus Niemand, is celebrated in this documentary directed by Michael Cross. Phillips was a key figure in the underground music of the 1980s — literally underground, in the case of Jameson’s bar, and figuratively in that most of his music was kept off the airwaves by state censors. Max du Preez, Zapiro, Pieter-Dirk Uys, Koos Kombuis and Vusi Mahlesela contribute their views and memories of Phillips. Details: The documentary screens as part of the 20th Encounters South African International Documentary Film Festival, premiering in Cape Town on Friday June 1 at The Labia at 8pm, and showing in Johannesburg at Cinema Nouveau Rosebank on Saturday June 2 at 7.45pm.