As the country’s water resources continue to be under pressure, the question of equity and the allocation of water for transformation, the goal of which is poverty eradication and promoting sustainable socioeconomic development, is critical. Given that water is a catalyst for, and affects the development of, the economy, it is reasonable to conclude that a failure to allocate water to previously disadvantaged individuals would undermine the principle of equity. Equitable access to water and the benefits derived from it are central to transformation and to moving previously disadvantaged people from the periphery of the economy to the mainstream economy. The department of water and sanitation firmly believes that equity requires much more awereness that for a long time some sections of the population were historically denied access to water and its economic benefits. The upshot of this has been a source of great concern and deprivation. Yet this does not deny the fact that much work has been done since 1994 to provide clean, quality water to people. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.