Sex must be voluntary — if it is not, then it is illegal.” This is the straightforward language of a new Swedish law set to change the way rape and other sexual crimes are prosecuted in the country. (The New York Times) A mobile collapsible museum will tour Ghana over the next year as its creators use art and culture to wrestle with what it means to be Ghanaian today.
The project, which starts this week, is the brainchild of of ANO Institute of Contemporary Arts, a cultural organisation based in Accra. (Quartz) As Facebook reels from the Cambridge Analytica scandal and gears up for GDPR in Europe, the company is attempting to bolster its image as a responsible tech company. Case in point: an 11-minute short film all about its efforts to fight fake news. (Quartz) A federal judge on Wednesday ruled that it is unconstitutional for President Donald Trump to block people from his Twitter account, and ordered him to unblock those he has prevented from seeing his tweets. Apple once had grand aspirations to build its own electric self-driving car and lead the next generation of transportation. Over time, the tech giant’s ambitions ran into reality. (The New York Times) Job losses in SA’s mining sector continue unabated, with AngloGold Ashanti set to cut 2000 jobs to shrink its support structure after selling and closing mines in the country. Never mind Thursday’s interest rates decision, economists say the South African Reserve Bank will not be cutting the repo rate again in 2018. Three months after leaving the highest office in the country, former president Jacob Zuma is said not to have the money to keep fighting his prosecution for fraud, corruption, money laundering and racketeering. READ MORE: Big legal battles for prominent SA officials scheduled for June Nearly half of the country’s 257 municipalities are struggling to deliver services to residents, collect revenue and pay their debt. READ MORE: Local government audits regress Former South African cricket supremo Dr Ali Bacher hopes the public will understand and accept AB de Villiers’ shock decision to retire from international cricket, a year before the World Cup. READ MORE: AB de Villiers retires from international cricket The Citizen Mahumapelo steps aside as North West premier, but will still have power in the province as he retains his position as ANC provincial chairperson READ MORE: Supra Mahumapelo takes ‘early retirement’ Boyfriend gets text messages saying abductors wanted the baby First the mayor’s guest house went up in flames. Then her private house and four vehicles were destroyed. No doubt, the people of Koster are tired of false promises!