Pan African Rum Festival: This festival brings together the finest rums emerging from South Africa’s pioneering craft distilleries, along with exotic selections from Africa’s historical rum regions, including Madagascar, Mauritius and Reunion Island. A wide selection of gourmet street food will also be available.
Details: The festival takes place on May 6 at 73 Juta Street, Johannesburg. All attendees must be over the age of 18. Tickets cost R155 a person from quicket.co.za Word N Sound Poetry League, Season 8: The Word N Sound series is a platform for the expression of the spoken word. This series is not a commercial venture; it is all about having a positive effect on youth. Details: Season 8 takes place on May 5 at the Market Theatre Laboratory, 138 Lilian Ngoyi Street, Newtown, Johannesburg, from midday until early evening. Tickets are R50 a person and can be bought online from webtickets.co.za Yoga at Circa Art Gallery: Join Yoga Works for a session at one of Joburg’s striking venues — the Circa Art Gallery in Rosebank. The session will take inspiration from the gallery’s colourful artworks, which will surround the yogis. Details: The session is 75 minutes of slow vinyasa flow for people all levels. Bring a yoga mat. Entrance costs R120 a person and tickets are available from webtickets.co.za Pop-up Cinema by the Sea: This initiative takes film out of the theatre and into the city. The unique screens enhance and redefine the cinema experience. Take pillows, blankets, picnics and anything else you think you’ll need to enjoy an evening on the beach. Details: The pop-up movie will take place on May 6 at Clifton’s 3rd Beach, Cape Town. Tickets cost R100 a person and are available at quicket.co.za. Sound will be transmitted to wireless headphones that will be given to ticket holders before the screening. All the standard rules of Clifton 3rd Beach apply. For more information visit pop-upcinema.com Modjaji Books pop-up shop: Need to satisfy your literary cravings? Buy local books at cut prices at Modjaji Books’ pop-up. Expect Modjaji notebooks and postcards, books that you have struggled to find in other retail spaces and discounts of up to 60%. Details: The event takes place at Sybrand Park, Cape Town, on May  4 and 5. For more information on the exact address, email cdhiggs@gmail.com or send an SMS to 072 774 3546.