There was not much in the way of surprise as the PSL announced the nominees for its end of season awards late on Monday morning. Sundowns will be expected to scoop the most high-profile accolades but there are noteworthy dark horses that could trample the Brazilian party. Star player Percy Tau headlined both footballer of the season and player’s player of the season.
The tricky forward is the favourite to clinch the award for a 11-goal season that guided Sundowns to the league title and has seen him persistently linked with a big-money move to Europe. Teammate Hlompho Kekana and Maritzburg United’s Siphesihle Ndlovu will challenge Tau for the honour of being called the footballer of the season – chosen by the PSL’s 16 coaches. It’s not the first time Kekana has been nominated for the award but he’s yet to receive that particular slice of recognition for his years of service. Ndlovu, also nominated for young player of the season, was literally at the centre of a fantastic season for the Team of Choice. That same success has given coach Fadlu Davids the best chance of preventing Sundowns’ Pitso Mosimane from grabbing the coach of the season. Davids’ transformation of Maritzburg has been widely hailed as he guided them to fourth place and the Nedbank Cup final. Milutin Sredojević, meanwhile, was recognised for his equally remarkable improvement of Orlando Pirates from shambles to title contenders. The winners will be announced at a PSL dinner on Tuesday evening. See the full list of nominations below: Footballer of the Season Hlompho Kekana (Mamelodi Sundowns) Siphesihle Ndlovu (Maritzburg United) Percy Tau (Mamelodi Sundowns) Absa Premiership Player’s Player of the Season Siphesihle Ndlovu (Maritzburg United) Musa Nyatama (Orlando Pirates) Percy Tau (Mamelodi Sundowns) Absa Premiership Goalkeeper of the Season Itumeleng Khune (Kaizer Chiefs) Richard Ofori (Maritzburg United) Dennis Onyango (Mamelodi Sundowns) Absa Premiership Defender of the Season Bevan Fransman (Maritzburg United) Innocent Maela (Orlando Pirates) Siyanda Xulu (Maritzburg United) Absa Premiership Midfielder of the Season Hlompho Kekana (Mamelodi Sundowns) Siphesihle Ndlovu (Maritzburg United) Musa Nyatama (Orlando Pirates) Absa Premiership Young Player of the Season Sibusiso Mabaliso (Amazulu) Teboho Mokoena (SuperSport United) Siphesihle Ndlovu (Maritzburg United) Absa Premiership Coach of the Season Fadlu Davids (Maritzburg United) Pitso Mosimane (Mamelodi Sundowns) Milutin Sredjoevic (Orlando Pirates) Nedbank Cup Player of the Tournament Andrea Feleccia (Free State Stars) Lebohang Maboe (Maritzburg United) Thela Ngobeni (Free State Stars)