Some 175,000 employees across 8,000 stores will receive the racial bias training, after a Philadelphia store manager called the police on two black men sitting in a store in April. Musician Common is helping out.
(Quartz) Political ethics and sports don’t match well. The recent deal between Rwanda and Arsenal is potentially a case in point. (The Conversation) In Tanzania today, political space has shrunk to the point where protests are suppressed before they emerge. (The Conversation) American diplomats made a rare visit to North Korea as officials sought to dispel skepticism about the chances of reaching a framework for a deal in such a short time. (The New York Times) After eight years of budget cutting, Britain is looking less like the rest of Europe and more like the United States, with a shrinking welfare state and spreading poverty. (The New York Times) The NPA yesterday denied bungling the court challenge brought by Gupta-linked companies and individuals against a provisional preservation order for assets worth more than R250-million READ MORE: Court lifts AFU restraint order in Vrede dairy case Doctors at Chris Hani Baragwanath Academic Hospital allegedly forgot a swab in a young mother’s abdomen that was removed only two days later. The Citizen The University of Pretoria says it is not on an anti-Afrikaans crusade because it wants to change the names of students’ residences. The mother of murdered Cape Town toddler Courtney Pieters broke down in the Western Cape High Court yesterday, as she recalled the events of a year ago when the three-year-old went missing and was later found buried in a shallow grave. READ MORE: Slice Of Life: A killer among us Telkom shareholders could be the next beneficiaries of President Ramaphosa’s “new dawn” as an improving economic outlook means the state is no longer hard pressed to sell strategic assets. Public sector employees are losing out on a big payday due to the delayed conclusion of their draft wage agreement. In an unexpected move, Saftu has requested a meeting with its rival, Cosatu, to discuss “issues of common interest” Classes at a North West school have been suspended after pupils were attacked and injured by a group of juvenile inmates who accused the learners of being drug addicts. An army major has been fired for allegedly posting on social media that it was now “white people’s turn to be killed and tortured as a revenge for apartheid”. The #UniteBehind civil society coalition is supporting Prasa against an allegedly unlawful tender awarded to IT and security company Siyangena Technologies Speaking in Tshwane as part of Child Protection Week, deputy social development minister Hendriette Bogopane-Zulu lashed out at parents who buy alcohol with their kids grant money.